SOURCE: references/AssistancePaper/drones-08-00702-v2.pdf
PAGES: 28



===== PAGE 1 / 28 =====
Citation: Arafat, M.Y.; Pan, S. Urban
Air Mobility Communications and
Networking: Recent Advances,
Techniques, and Challenges. Drones
2024, 8, 702. https://doi.org/
10.3390/drones8120702
Academic Editor: Pablo
Rodríguez-Gonzálvez
Received: 20 September 2024
Revised: 19 November 2024
Accepted: 21 November 2024
Published: 24 November 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Review
Urban Air Mobility Communications and Networking: Recent
Advances, Techniques, and Challenges
Muhammad Yeasir Arafat
 and Sungbum Pan *
IT Research Institute, Chosun University, Gwangju 61452, Republic of Korea; myarafat@chosun.ac.kr
* Correspondence: sbpan@chosun.ac.kr; Tel.: +82-62-230-6158
Abstract: Over the past few years, our traditional ground-based transportation system has encoun-
tered various challenges, including overuse, traffic congestion, growing urban populations, high
infrastructure costs, and disorganization. Unmanned aerial vehicles, commonly referred to as drones,
have significantly impacted aerial communication in both the academic and industrial sectors. There-
fore, researchers and scientists from the aviation and automotive industries have collaborated to
create an innovative air transport system that solves traditional transport problems. In the coming
years, urban air mobility (UAM) is expected to become an emerging air transportation system that
enables on-demand air travel. UAM is also anticipated to offer more environmentally friendly, cost-
effective, and faster modes of transportation than ground-based alternatives. Owing to the unique
characteristics of personal air vehicles, ensuring reliable communication and maintaining proper
safety and security, air traffic management, collision detection, path planning, and highly accurate
localization and navigation have become increasingly complex. This article provides an extensive
literature review of recent technologies to address the challenges UAM faces. First, we present UAM
communication requirements in terms of coverage, data rate, latency, spectrum efficiency, networking,
and computing capabilities. Subsequently, we identify the potential key technological enablers to
meet these requirements and overcome their challenges. Finally, we discuss open research issues,
challenges, and future research directions for UAM deployment.
Keywords: advanced air mobility (AAM); drones; eVTOL; flying vehicles; future mobility; personal
air vehicles (PAVs); urban air mobility (UAM); unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs); vertical takeoff
and landing
1. Introduction
As urban population density has increased in recent decades, traffic congestion and
commuter delays have risen unprecedentedly. By 2050, approximately 80% of the European
and North American populations are estimated to live in metropolitan regions [ 1]. As
a result of this phenomenal growth, major cities worldwide continue to face escalating
infrastructure and mobility issues. Additionally, urbanization leads to conflict, pollution,
and congestion, negatively affecting both human and environmental health [2]. According
to the European Institute of Innovation and Technology, congestion costs 130 billion euros
annually in Europe [3]. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate new mobility concepts and
paradigms to reduce commuting times, avoid ground traffic, and enable point-to-point
flight between cities. A revolutionary air transportation method called urban air mobility
(UAM) has emerged to alleviate ground traffic saturation by providing an alternative mode
of transport for both intercity and intracity travel. In this scenario, UAM offers a new dimen-
sion to city commuting by extending transportation into the urban airspace. With UAM,
intercity connections are enhanced through vertical mobility, thus offering efficient and
environmentally friendly alternatives to traditional ground transport. Transport authorities
expect UAM to be a crucial part of the smart city initiative. In particular, municipalities
anticipate that UAM will deliver a variety of services, including medical assistance, rescue
Drones 2024, 8, 702. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones8120702 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/drones

===== PAGE 2 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 2 of 28
missions, and parcel delivery, as part of a smart city initiative [4]. As shown in Figure 1,
UAM has a wide range of applications in both the military and civil sectors.
Drones 2024, 8, 702 2 of 28 
 
particular, municipalities anticipate that UAM will deliver a variety of services, including 
medical assistance, rescue missions, and parcel delivery, as part of a smart city initiative 
[4]. As shown in Figure 1, UAM has a wide range of applications in both the military and 
civil sectors. 
With the advent of UAM, the aviation in dustry has revolutionized and disrupted 
traditional mobility systems and urban planning. Leading aviation companies are com-
peting to advance the vertical takeo ﬀ and landing (VTOL) technologies and prototypes 
and the mass-production of VTOL vehicles that air taxi services will use in the future [5]. 
An air taxi is a small electric aircraft with an average seating capacity of four that can be 
used on demand to transport passengers in metropolitan areas. In addition, several com-
panies have already conducted extensive test ﬂights using their electrical vertical takeoﬀ 
and landing (eVTOL) technology, which has been demonstrated in several countries 
worldwide [6]. In a large city, air taxis can take oﬀ and land vertically using eVTOL tech-
nology, which is similar to the technology used by helicopters. UAM primarily utilizes 
VTOL technology to develop aircraft, providing an eco-friendly solution in terms of pol-
lution, economic viability, enhanced safety, and improved fault tolerance. Most VTOL air-
craft are likely to be powered by eVTOL technology, enabling operations without a run-
way, thereby providing signiﬁcant savings in both space and time [7]. UAM still needs to 
be available and usable on demand because many challenges remain to be overcome [8]. 
UAM operation and connectivity are challenging issues. Owing to its low-altitude ﬂight 
characteristics, UAM experiences interference  and disturbances in communication with 
base stations [9]. Security is of paramount importance in the communication and control 
paradigms. During takeo ﬀ and landing, UAM requires congestion management and air 
traﬃc routing, which are far more complex and prone to accidents than the traditional 
high-altitude ﬂights [10]. Moreover, multi-eVTOL swarms present signiﬁcant challenges 
in terms of collision avoidance, topology control, and task scheduling [11]. The e ﬀective 
and robust use of UAM requires a robust and scalable infrastructure, particularly in highly 
congested urban environments [12]. 
 
Figure 1. Applications of UAM in the military and civil domains. 
Figure 1. Applications of UAM in the military and civil domains.
With the advent of UAM, the aviation industry has revolutionized and disrupted tra-
ditional mobility systems and urban planning. Leading aviation companies are competing
to advance the vertical takeoff and landing (VTOL) technologies and prototypes and the
mass-production of VTOL vehicles that air taxi services will use in the future [5]. An air
taxi is a small electric aircraft with an average seating capacity of four that can be used
on demand to transport passengers in metropolitan areas. In addition, several companies
have already conducted extensive test flights using their electrical vertical takeoff and
landing (eVTOL) technology, which has been demonstrated in several countries world-
wide [6]. In a large city, air taxis can take off and land vertically using eVTOL technology,
which is similar to the technology used by helicopters. UAM primarily utilizes VTOL
technology to develop aircraft, providing an eco-friendly solution in terms of pollution,
economic viability, enhanced safety, and improved fault tolerance. Most VTOL aircraft
are likely to be powered by eVTOL technology, enabling operations without a runway,
thereby providing significant savings in both space and time [ 7]. UAM still needs to be
available and usable on demand because many challenges remain to be overcome [ 8].
UAM operation and connectivity are challenging issues. Owing to its low-altitude flight
characteristics, UAM experiences interference and disturbances in communication with
base stations [9]. Security is of paramount importance in the communication and control
paradigms. During takeoff and landing, UAM requires congestion management and air
traffic routing, which are far more complex and prone to accidents than the traditional
high-altitude flights [10]. Moreover, multi-eVTOL swarms present significant challenges
in terms of collision avoidance, topology control, and task scheduling [11]. The effective
and robust use of UAM requires a robust and scalable infrastructure, particularly in highly
congested urban environments [12].
UAM represents a disruptive technology that has revolutionized the entire transporta-
tion industry. We provide a comparative analysis between UAM and existing transporta-
tion systems to better understand its feasibility. In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles

===== PAGE 3 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 3 of 28
(UAVs), commonly known as drones, have been operated with radio remote-control equip-
ment and self-contained programmed controls, or with onboard computers that operate
fully autonomously or intermittently [13]. A flying ad hoc network (FANET) consists of
a variety of aerial nodes such as drones or flying vehicles, operating in the on-demand
ad hoc mode [14]. A FANET can be utilized in a wide variety of applications, including
search and rescue in remote areas, damage assessment, wildlife monitoring, the detection
of forest fires, pollution or crowd monitoring, surveillance, and public safety [15]. UAV or
drone networks are organized similarly to FANET [16]. However, the nodes consist solely
of UAVs that are remotely controlled or have predetermined trajectories. The deployment
of a drone- or UAV-based network requires precise orchestration of the UAVs’ mobility and
trajectory, which are essential characteristics of these networks [17]. The versatility, mobility,
and flexibility of UAV or drone networks make them increasingly useful across various
industries and fields. There is a wide range of applications, such as logistics delivery,
agriculture, crop monitoring, border patrolling, planting and spraying, and temporary
network deployment [18]. A UAM is a self-organizing architecture model divided into
two main layers: aerial and ground. In urban environments, UAM refers to both manned
and unmanned air vehicle systems used for the transportation of people and goods. With
UAM, a new way of traveling within urban areas will be introduced, which will, in turn,
help reduce congestion [ 19]. Table 1 summarizes the major characteristics of FANETs,
UAV/drone networks, and UAM.
Table 1. Comparison of the main characteristics of FANETs, UAV/drone networks, and UAM.
Criteria FANETs UA V/Drone Networks UAM
Domain Temporary ad hoc network Single- or multiuser
operations Specific missions
Autonomy level Unmanned and fully
autonomous Unmanned
Manned (human-controlled)
and unmanned (fully
autonomous)
Control Distributed Distributed and centralized Mostly centralized
Communication and
navigation technology
Wi-Fi, GPS, and radio
frequency (RF) Wi-Fi, GPS, and RF
Fourth-generation wireless
(4G)/fifth-generation wireless
(5G), GPS, RF, and visual signal
Path planning Dynamic and based on the
applications
Depends on the remote
controller
Pre-planned path for specific
mission
Communication distance Short range Short and medium range Long range
Flying altitude Low to medium Low Low to medium
Propulsion technology Battery power Battery power Battery power and fuel
Network integration Satellites and high-altitude
platform stations (HAPs).
Aerial-to-ground (A2G)
station
Air traffic control on a ground
station
UAM technology includes advanced aircraft, upgraded airspace management systems,
and autonomous navigation systems. UAM is also supported by a range of advanced
technologies such as electric propulsion, high-tech materials, and sensors for navigation
and safety [20]. These technologies are used to develop quieter, safer, and more efficient
vehicles than traditional aircraft. The most prominent UAM projects include eVTOL aircraft,
which take off vertically and fly horizontally [21]. These aircraft are designed to use electric
propulsion and batteries, allowing them to be more efficient and quieter than traditional
aircraft [22]. They will also be able to fly at lower altitudes, allowing them to access
airspaces not currently used by commercial aircraft [ 23]. One of the key challenges for
achieving success in UAM is maintaining safe flight in a highly dynamic environment.
At present, most UAM research is focused on the structural aspect, and is similar to
current air traffic management (ATM) techniques [24]. However, significant attention must

===== PAGE 4 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 4 of 28
be paid to UAM safety management. One major concern is the uncertainty of aircraft
location. Due to positioning errors caused by the global positioning system (GPS), aircraft
may not be able to accurately obtain the location information of other aircraft, leading to
potential safety risks [25]. Furthermore, these issues can arise from inaccurate sensor data,
performance variance caused by the dynamic nature of the environment, and environmental
factors, such as winds, low-altitude birds, and high-rise buildings [26]. Therefore, more
real-life constraints must be considered when designing a collision avoidance approach
for UAM [ 27]. Although UAM is still in its early stages of development, its potential
is immense. As technology continues to evolve, it could have a significant impact on
urban transportation.
1.1. Contributions of This Study
A brief overview of UAM operations is provided in this article along with a discussion
of their key features. These aspects include power consumption, vertical takeoff and
landing systems, autonomy level, UAM integration with existing networks, and ATM.
Subsequently, we review existing communication techniques in UAM. These techniques
include communication data types, spectrum and frequency management, communication
reliability, security issues, navigation, route networks, trajectory, collision avoidance, and
flight scheduling. Finally, a discussion is presented on the opportunities and challenges
associated with UAM development and its potential impact on society. Table 2 provides a
list of acronyms for ease of reading and understanding.
Table 2. List of acronyms.
UAM—Urban air mobility VTOL—Vertical takeoff and landing
eVTOL—Electrical vertical takeoff and landing FANET—Flying ad hoc network
UAV—Unmanned aerial vehicle ATM—Air traffic management
HAPs—High-altitude platform stations A2G—Air-to-ground
A2A—Air-to-air U2I—UAV-to-infrastructure
DEP—Distributed electric propulsion UAS—Unmanned aerial aircraft
LOS—Line-of-sight NLOS—Non-line-of-sight
BLOS—Blind-line-of-sight CNPC—Control and non-payload communication
C2—Control and command ATC—Air traffic control
UTM—Unmanned aircraft traffic management GS—Ground station
LEO—Low-Earth orbit GEO—Geostationary equatorial orbit
CDAA—Collision detect-and-avoid systems CNS—Communication, navigation, and surveillance
D2D—Device-to-device FAA—Federal aviation administration
EASA—European aviation safety agency PAV—Personal air vehicle
SESAR—Single European Sky ATM research NASA—National aeronautics and space administration
ACAS—Airborne collision avoidance system TCAS—Traffic collision avoidance system
In this study, we aim to gain insight into UAM communication and networking tech-
niques from the existing literature. The papers were retrieved from large online databases
rather than being handpicked by specific publishers. As a part of our literature review,
we searched for articles that address any aspect of UAM communication and networking.
The most significant technical publishers, such as the association for computing machin-
ery (ACM), Elsevier, IEEE Explore, Springer, Frontiers, Google Scholar, and arXiV , were
searched for relevant publications. In this study, we gathered articles published in 2015 as
well as the most recent papers published in 2024. To accommodate the varying capabilities

===== PAGE 5 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 5 of 28
of the search functions of each database, we made necessary adjustments to the search
string. Since UAM is a relatively new technology, most of the references are current.
1.2. Outline of the Paper
This review is organized into five sections, as shown in Figure 2. The remainder of
the paper is outlined below. In the next section, we present the different aspects of UAM
operating concepts, including the power source, takeoff and landing, level of autonomy,
integration with existing networks, and energy consumption. Afterward, we reviewed
recent communication techniques in UAM. Following this, we present open research issues,
challenges, and future research directions. Finally, we conclude the study in the next section.
Drones 2024, 8, 702 5 of 28 
of the search functions of each database, we  made necessary adjustments to the search 
string. Since UAM is a relatively new technology, most of the references are current. 
1.2. Outline of the Paper 
This review is organized into ﬁve sections, as shown in Figure 2. The remainder of 
the paper is outlined below. In the next section, we present the di ﬀerent aspects of UAM 
operating concepts, including the power source, takeo ﬀ and landing, level of autonomy, 
integration with existing networks, and energy consumption. Afterward, we reviewed re-
cent communication techniques in UAM. Following this, we present open research issues, 
challenges, and future research directions. Finally, we conclude the study in the next sec-
tion. 
 
Figure 2. Outline of the paper. 
2. Operational Concepts of UAM
Generally, UAM specializes in transportation within urban areas or intercity within 
short and medium distances (3–100 km), ﬂying at ultralow altitudes below 100 m, and in 
low-altitude airspace between 100 m and 1000 m [28]. With the current technology, 
manned aerial vehicles are capable of carrying up to ﬁve passengers. In urban ﬂights, bat-
teries (lithium or hydrogen fuel cells) provide power, whereas in intercity ﬂights, hybrid-
electric propulsion may be employed [29]. Re cent technological advancements in electri-
ﬁcation, automation, and VTOL have made it possible to develop new aircraft designs, 
services, and business models. The combination of these factors provides new opportuni-
ties for the on-demand use of UAM aircraft in the transportation of commodities. UAM 
vehicles have many diﬀerent requirements and boundary conditions compared with con-
ventional aircraft designs [30]. In Figure 3, the fundamental design factors that in ﬂuence 
the selection of aircraft type and the ensuing design speciﬁcations are described. 
Figure 2. Outline of the paper.
2. Operational Concepts of UAM
Generally, UAM specializes in transportation within urban areas or intercity within
short and medium distances (3–100 km), flying at ultralow altitudes below 100 m, and in
low-altitude airspace between 100 m and 1000 m [28]. With the current technology, manned
aerial vehicles are capable of carrying up to five passengers. In urban flights, batteries
(lithium or hydrogen fuel cells) provide power, whereas in intercity flights, hybrid-electric
propulsion may be employed [29]. Recent technological advancements in electrification,
automation, and VTOL have made it possible to develop new aircraft designs, services,
and business models. The combination of these factors provides new opportunities for
the on-demand use of UAM aircraft in the transportation of commodities. UAM vehicles
have many different requirements and boundary conditions compared with conventional
aircraft designs [30]. In Figure 3, the fundamental design factors that influence the selection
of aircraft type and the ensuing design specifications are described.

===== PAGE 6 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 6 of 28
Drones 2024, 8, 702 6 of 28 
 
 
Figure 3. Taxonomy of various aspects of UAM. 
2.1. Power Source 
Recent developments in distributed electric propulsion (DEP) and advanced electric 
technology have led to an increase in the popularity of UAM aerial vehicles [31]. With the 
help of these technologies, we have been able to combine strongly divergent and under-
lying operational needs to design di ﬀerent aircraft types. As shown in Figure 3, UAMs 
can be divided into two categories based on the mechanism that allows VTOL and lift 
generation during a ﬂight. Through the development and use of DEP, academics and in-
dustry specialists have been able to design aircraft with acceptable levels of system com-
plexity and weight for both rotary-wing and ﬁxed-wing cruise aircraft [32]. Fuel combus-
tion engines, particularly diesel engines, oﬀer a much higher energy density than the cur-
rent battery technologies. With diesel fuel providing several times more energy per kilo-
gram than lithium-ion batteries, UAVs can carry heavier payloads or ﬂy longer distances 
without refueling or recharging. However, hybrid powertrains use a combustion engine 
to produce electricity, which is subsequently used to drive electric motors. Electric motors 
provide the beneﬁts of combustion engines in terms of range and endurance, while gen-
erating less noise and lower emissions. 
2.2. Takeoﬀ and Landing 
According to Table 3, UAVs are generally classiﬁed according to their physical struc-
ture, such as ﬁxed and rotary wings. During ﬂight, rotary-wing ﬂight vehicles produce lift 
from spinning wings. In cruise ﬂight, they are often limited by the e ﬃciency of cruise 
speed and, therefore, have a limited range [33]. However, rotary-wing vehicles exhibit 
excellent hovering and vertical takeoﬀ and landing capabilities. Along with standard hel-
icopters, rotary-wing vehicles also adopt multicopter designs. Rotors are often assembled 
in stacks at the expense of aerodynamic performance to combat the large footprint caused 
by the large rotor surfaces [34]. Lift-fan vehicles have compact dimensions. Under hover-
ing conditions, lift-fan vehicles are substantially less e ﬀective than rotary-wing vehicles. 
However, the compact dimensions of lift-fan vehicles allow them to be designed to be the 
same size as automobiles. As lift-fan vehicles have a small cross-sectional area, they pro-
duce high downward velocities to generate suﬃcient thrust, which produces a signiﬁcant 
amount of noise. Despite the advantages of enclosed fans in ground-handling safety, re-
ducing noise is a signi ﬁcant challenge for this type of vehicle. Fixed-wing ﬂight vehicles 
are substantially faster and more e ﬃcient than rotary-wing vehicles during cruise ﬂight. 
Figure 3. Taxonomy of various aspects of UAM.
2.1. Power Source
Recent developments in distributed electric propulsion (DEP) and advanced electric
technology have led to an increase in the popularity of UAM aerial vehicles [ 31]. With
the help of these technologies, we have been able to combine strongly divergent and
underlying operational needs to design different aircraft types. As shown in Figure 3,
UAMs can be divided into two categories based on the mechanism that allows VTOL
and lift generation during a flight. Through the development and use of DEP , academics
and industry specialists have been able to design aircraft with acceptable levels of system
complexity and weight for both rotary-wing and fixed-wing cruise aircraft [ 32]. Fuel
combustion engines, particularly diesel engines, offer a much higher energy density than
the current battery technologies. With diesel fuel providing several times more energy
per kilogram than lithium-ion batteries, UAVs can carry heavier payloads or fly longer
distances without refueling or recharging. However, hybrid powertrains use a combustion
engine to produce electricity, which is subsequently used to drive electric motors. Electric
motors provide the benefits of combustion engines in terms of range and endurance, while
generating less noise and lower emissions.
2.2. Takeoff and Landing
According to Table 3, UAVs are generally classified according to their physical struc-
ture, such as fixed and rotary wings. During flight, rotary-wing flight vehicles produce lift
from spinning wings. In cruise flight, they are often limited by the efficiency of cruise speed
and, therefore, have a limited range [33]. However, rotary-wing vehicles exhibit excellent
hovering and vertical takeoff and landing capabilities. Along with standard helicopters,
rotary-wing vehicles also adopt multicopter designs. Rotors are often assembled in stacks at
the expense of aerodynamic performance to combat the large footprint caused by the large
rotor surfaces [34]. Lift-fan vehicles have compact dimensions. Under hovering conditions,
lift-fan vehicles are substantially less effective than rotary-wing vehicles. However, the
compact dimensions of lift-fan vehicles allow them to be designed to be the same size
as automobiles. As lift-fan vehicles have a small cross-sectional area, they produce high
downward velocities to generate sufficient thrust, which produces a significant amount of
noise. Despite the advantages of enclosed fans in ground-handling safety, reducing noise is
a significant challenge for this type of vehicle. Fixed-wing flight vehicles are substantially
faster and more efficient than rotary-wing vehicles during cruise flight. While extending

===== PAGE 7 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 7 of 28
travel distances, this structure may reduce the hovering flight features and VTOL [35]. The
deployment of large rotor areas necessary for effective hovering flight is also constrained
by integration issues and the desire to increase cruise efficiency [36]. Figure 4 illustrates the
eVTOL horizontal and vertical landing approaches.
Table 3. Advantages and limitations of aerial vehicle types.
Category Advantages Limitations
Single rotor
VTOL and hover flight supported Costly
Long endurance and large coverage Require more training
High payload capability High risk
Multi-rotor
VTOL and hover flight supported Low area coverage
Support both indoor and outdoor Limited payload
Accessibility and easy to deploy Short flight time
Small and cluttered areas of coverage Low stability in wind
Fixed-wing
Long endurance and large coverage No VTOL and hover
High mobility Require more training
Great stability High price
Hybrid
Long endurance and large coverage Extra weight
VTOL supported High cruise drag forces
Easy to take off and land Under development
Drones 2024, 8, 702 7 of 28 
 
While extending travel distances, this  structure may reduce the hovering ﬂight features 
and VTOL [35]. The deployment of large rotor areas necessary for eﬀective hovering ﬂight 
is also constrained by integration issues and the desire to increase cruise e ﬃciency [36]. 
Figure 4 illustrates the eVTOL horizontal and vertical landing approaches. 
 
Figure 4. (a) Horizontal and (b) vertical landing approaches of eVTOL aircraft. 
Lift and cruise vehicles use two dist inct power tracks/trains for VTOL and ﬂight. 
There is no need for tilting mechanisms because all components for thrust generation are 
placed such that they provide thrust in the direction opposite to that of the desired motion. 
This reduces system complexity and enables the design of all rotors and propellers to their 
maximum potential. The tilt-wing aircraft and tail-si tters employ the same propulsion 
techniques during all ﬂight phases. Therefore, it is necessary to modify the propulsion 
system design. However, eﬃciency losses can be minimized by tuning specialized cruise 
propellers for di ﬀerent circumstances and turning o ﬀ VTOL propellers during ﬂight. In 
these systems, e ﬃcient aerodynamic and cruise ﬂight con ﬁgurations are possible by 
shrouding or folding unnecessary propulsors [37]. However, in a tilt-wing conﬁguration, 
tilting is mandatory, resulting in a heavier and more complex system. Tail-sitter arrange-
ments turn the entire vehicle by 90° for VTOL; in conjunction with e ﬀective ﬁxed-wing 
cruising. The airplane stands straight, with its front facing towards the sky during takeoﬀ. 
The vehicle gradually tilts to a horizontal ﬂight position after takeo ﬀ until it reaches a 
cruise ﬂight altitude. Although tilting mechanisms are not necessary, passenger comfort 
is a crucial component of tail-sitter UAM vehicles [38]. Reasonable solutions are required 
for a complete tilt-over to be safe and comfortable for passengers. For a comprehensive 
understanding of UAM vehicle types and their in ﬂuence on urban aerial transportation, 
detailed aerial vehicular systems and diﬀerent vehicle types are required. Communication 
techniques, navigation, geographical location, route, network, and ﬂight scheduling are 
necessary to study the relationship between certain aircraft characteristics and transport 
systems. 
Table 3. Advantages and limitations of aerial vehicle types. 
Category Advantages Limitations 
Single rotor 
VTOL and hover flight supported Costly 
Long endurance and large coverage Require more training 
High payload capability High risk 
Multi-rotor 
VTOL and hover flight supported Low area coverage 
Support both indoor and outdoor Limited payload 
Accessibility and easy to deploy Short flight time 
Figure 4. (a) Horizontal and (b) vertical landing approaches of eVTOL aircraft.
Lift and cruise vehicles use two distinct power tracks/trains for VTOL and flight.
There is no need for tilting mechanisms because all components for thrust generation are
placed such that they provide thrust in the direction opposite to that of the desired motion.
This reduces system complexity and enables the design of all rotors and propellers to their
maximum potential. The tilt-wing aircraft and tail-sitters employ the same propulsion tech-
niques during all flight phases. Therefore, it is necessary to modify the propulsion system
design. However, efficiency losses can be minimized by tuning specialized cruise propellers
for different circumstances and turning off VTOL propellers during flight. In these systems,
efficient aerodynamic and cruise flight configurations are possible by shrouding or folding
unnecessary propulsors [37]. However, in a tilt-wing configuration, tilting is mandatory,
resulting in a heavier and more complex system. Tail-sitter arrangements turn the entire
vehicle by 90◦ for VTOL; in conjunction with effective fixed-wing cruising. The airplane
stands straight, with its front facing towards the sky during takeoff. The vehicle gradually

===== PAGE 8 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 8 of 28
tilts to a horizontal flight position after takeoff until it reaches a cruise flight altitude. Al-
though tilting mechanisms are not necessary, passenger comfort is a crucial component of
tail-sitter UAM vehicles [38]. Reasonable solutions are required for a complete tilt-over
to be safe and comfortable for passengers. For a comprehensive understanding of UAM
vehicle types and their influence on urban aerial transportation, detailed aerial vehicular
systems and different vehicle types are required. Communication techniques, navigation,
geographical location, route, network, and flight scheduling are necessary to study the
relationship between certain aircraft characteristics and transport systems.
2.3. Level of Autonomy
UAM aerial vehicles can be operated in many different ways, including autonomously,
piloted by a human, or by a combination of both [39]. The level of autonomy and the need
for a human pilot may differ depending on the type of aerial vehicle and the regulatory
environment. Taking advantage of sensors and navigation systems, fully autonomous
aerial vehicles can operate without the involvement of a human pilot, make independent
decisions, and operate without guidance from a human. These systems can offer increased
efficiency, reliability, and safety benefits. In addition, fully autonomous vehicles can
operate in hazardous or complex environments that humans cannot access. However,
fully autonomous vehicles also present their own challenges, such as the need for robust
and reliable sensors, navigational systems, and communication systems, as well as the
possibility of technical malfunctions [ 40]. Remote controls or other interfaces control
human-piloted aerial vehicles. These systems offer the benefits of human judgment and
decision-making, but they may be less efficient and less safe than fully autonomous systems,
especially in complex or dynamic environments. There are also hybrid systems that
combine autonomous and human-piloted operations, such as systems that allow the pilot
to take control of the UAV in an emergency or when the UAV encounters unexpected
situations [41]. Overall, UAV autonomy is crucial in designing and operating these systems.
UAV control plays a crucial role in urban airspace development and UAV integration in
traffic management.
UAM autonomy levels can be classified based on human–technology collaboration.
The authors of [42] and the SESAR framework [43] classified UAM autonomy levels from
level 0, indicating no automation, to level 5, signifying full automation with swarm capa-
bilities. Gradations of levels enable an evolving UAM automation system that keeps pace
with ongoing technological advancements. Level 0 indicates no automation, where the
UAM fully operates under human control and pilots handle navigation, system monitoring,
takeoff, and landing. Level 1 indicates assisted automation, where the pilot controls the
vehicle, but automated assistance is involved, such as stability control, altitude holding,
and basic navigation. Level 2 represents enhanced automation, where major UAM flight
operations are performed by an autopilot but require pilot supervision. The autopilot
handles flight cruising, takeoff, and landing on a predefined path. Level 3 represents a high
degree of automation, where the UAM system autonomously handles all flight aspects,
such as navigation, obstacle avoidance, and real-time decision-making during flight. Level
4 is fully automated, where the UAM can operate autonomously without a pilot during
flight. Level 5 is swarm automation of UAM, in which UAM can be deployed on a large
scale. Using swarm automation, UAM can operate autonomously and self-organize with
advanced artificial intelligence and machine learning to adapt to various scenarios.
2.4. Integration with Existing Networks
The integration of UAM systems into existing transportation networks is an important
consideration. UAM systems, such as urban air taxis and delivery drones, have the potential
to revolutionize human transportation and goods delivery [44]. Compared with traditional
modes of transportation, UAM provides a convenient and efficient alternative. UAM
systems may be integrated into existing transportation networks to provide users with a
seamless and convenient travel experience. Public transit or ride-sharing services [45] can

===== PAGE 9 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 9 of 28
allow users to easily book a UAM ride or delivery through a single platform or app. They
can minimize the need for additional infrastructure, such as dedicated landing zones or
charging stations. Integrating UAM systems with existing transportation networks can
also reduce ground congestion and improve air quality by reducing the number of vehicles
on the road.
2.5. ATM
UAM poses several challenges that cannot be addressed using conventional ATM
techniques [46]. All types of aircraft, including commercial and military flying vehicles,
are controlled by ATM services, both in current and next-generation ATM systems. Unlike
commercial flights, which are intended to ensure the safe transportation of passengers and
containers between well-known airports, military planes protect the country’s airspace
from enemy attack and support ground troops. Increasingly, UAM will require a separate
ATM system or an adapted system that can accommodate on-demand, high-volume, and
short-range flights near urban areas [47]. Because these autonomous aircraft will provide
their services in densely populated urban airspaces, they are expected to operate under
tighter and more stringent rules than the present ATM system. Any UAM traffic manage-
ment system must also handle unusual occurrences safely without jeopardizing overall
performance [48]. A comparison of traditional ATM with UAM ATM is shown in Figure 5.
The UAM ATM framework requires collaboration between air and ground collaboration
systems, which combines the planning of urban airspace, traffic rules, and the management
of ground facilities.
Drones 2024, 8, 702 9 of 28 
 
users with a seamless and convenient travel experience. Public transit or ride-sharing ser-
vices [45] can allow users to easily book a UAM ride or delivery through a single platform 
or app. They can minimize the need for additional infrastructure, such as dedicated land-
ing zones or charging stations. Integrating UAM systems with existing transportation net-
works can also reduce ground congestion and improve air quality by reducing the number 
of vehicles on the road. 
2.5. ATM 
UAM poses several challenges that cannot be addressed using conventional ATM 
techniques [46]. All types of aircraft, including commercial and military ﬂying vehicles, 
are controlled by ATM services, both in current and next-generation ATM systems. Unlike 
commercial ﬂights, which are intended to ensure th e safe transportation of passengers 
and containers between well-known airports, military planes protect the country’s air-
space from enemy a ttack and support ground troops. Increasingly, UAM will require a 
separate ATM system or an adapted system that can accommodate on-demand, high-vol-
ume, and short-range ﬂights near urban areas [47]. Because these autonomous aircraft will 
provide their services in densely populated urban airspaces, they are expected to operate 
under tighter and more stringent rules than the present ATM system. Any UAM tra ﬃc 
management system must also handle unusua l occurrences safely without jeopardizing 
overall performance [48]. A comparison of traditional ATM with UAM ATM is shown in 
Figure 5. The UAM ATM framework requires collaboration between air and ground col-
laboration systems, which combines the planning of urban airspace, traﬃc rules, and the 
management of ground facilities. 
 
Figure 5. Comparison between traditional ATM and UAM ATM. 
Unmanned aerial aircraft (UAS) tra ﬃc management is a proposed tra ﬃc manage-
ment system for tiny UAS that adopt a federated approach to maintaining airspace access 
[49]. Various safety-oriented services, including aircraft separation [50] and geofencing 
[51], are widely utilized in ATM. However, when using this strategy, there may be prob-
lems with scalability, both in terms of the size of the UAM vehicles and the density of 
UAM traﬃc. There is an increasing need to investigate the architecture of a well-devel-
oped ATM system capable of securely and e ﬀectively controlling UAM tra ﬃc. Figure 6 
shows the basic framework of UAM ATM. UAM tra ﬃc management issues for eVTOL 
vehicles are divided into three categories: airspace planning, traﬃc rules and operational 
control, and ground infrastructure management [52]. 
UAM needs to reﬁne the airspace planning and management of existing low-altitude 
uncontrolled airspaces. A ﬂight-level airspace structure can provide a be tter balance be-
tween operational safety and airspace capaci ty. To plan ground infrastructure, urban 
Figure 5. Comparison between traditional ATM and UAM ATM.
Unmanned aerial aircraft (UAS) traffic management is a proposed traffic management
system for tiny UAS that adopt a federated approach to maintaining airspace access [49].
Various safety-oriented services, including aircraft separation [ 50] and geofencing [ 51],
are widely utilized in ATM. However, when using this strategy, there may be problems
with scalability, both in terms of the size of the UAM vehicles and the density of UAM
traffic. There is an increasing need to investigate the architecture of a well-developed ATM
system capable of securely and effectively controlling UAM traffic. Figure 6 shows the
basic framework of UAM ATM. UAM traffic management issues for eVTOL vehicles are
divided into three categories: airspace planning, traffic rules and operational control, and
ground infrastructure management [52].

===== PAGE 10 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 10 of 28
Drones 2024, 8, 702 10 of 28 
 
origin–destination data can be used to predict the tra ﬃc demand of UAM. The manage-
ment of vertiports will have a signi ﬁcant impact on the air route network as well as the 
layout of communication, navigation, and moni toring stations. UAM will be faced with 
more complex integrated operation scenarios involving manned and unmanned vehicles 
in terms of traﬃc rules and operational control. UAM traﬃc rules must be innovated and 
remain compatible with existing air traﬃc regulations [53]. A high-bandwidth communi-
cation system will allow UAM operational control to move in the direction of autonomous 
decision-making and self-piloting based on air–ground coordinates. 
 
Figure 6. UAM ATM framework. 
Furthermore, the SESAR automation roadmap [43] provides a vision for the future 
of ATM and identiﬁes key phases for integrating automation technologies, particularly in 
light of the increasing complexity of airspace usage, as well as the integration of new air-
craft types into UAM, including unmanned aerial vehicles and air taxis. The roadmap 
focuses on improving the safety, e ﬃciency, and capacity of air tra ﬃc systems through 
automation. According to SESAR, there are di ﬀerent levels of automation across various 
aspects of ATM, ranging from ﬂight planning and departure sequencing to conﬂict detec-
tion and resolution, in-ﬂight automation, and landing coordination. 
Currently, both the FAA and EASA are heavily investing in the integration of UAM 
and UAVs into existing ATM systems. Their work focuses on developing air traﬃc control 
systems (e.g., UTM in the U.S. and U-Space in Europe), airspace integration, safety stand-
ards, and certiﬁcation processes for new aircraft types, such as eVTOL aircraft. Key eﬀorts 
include ensuring the safe use of airspace, support for multi-vehicle operations, and the 
development of regulatory frameworks to accommodate the growing volume of low-alti-
tude aviation in urban areas. A new airspace management system is being developed by 
the FAA to support UAM operations, which require coordination between manned and 
unmanned vehicles, particularly at low altitudes in urban areas. An important aspect of 
this process is the development of UAM corridors and vertiports (takeo ﬀ and landing 
zones). As part of its studies on the integration of UAM vehicles into the national airspace, 
the FAA will focus on how eVTOL aircraft and drones interact with traditional aircraft. 
Both tra ﬃc management and collision avoidance te chnologies are used to ensure that 
UAM operations do not interfere with existing air tra ﬃc. The U-Space concept, which is 
similar to the FAA’s UTM initiative, is one of the EASA’s key initiatives for the integration 
of UAM into the European airspace. It consists  of a set of services and procedures that 
facilitate the safe integration of drones and electric VTOL aircraft into the European air-
space. This framework supports automated ﬂight management such as conﬂict detection 
and resolution, real-time ﬂight tracking, and dynamic ai rspace management, which are 
essential for managing the high volume of UAM vehicles in cities. 
Figure 6. UAM ATM framework.
UAM needs to refine the airspace planning and management of existing low-altitude
uncontrolled airspaces. A flight-level airspace structure can provide a better balance be-
tween operational safety and airspace capacity. To plan ground infrastructure, urban
origin–destination data can be used to predict the traffic demand of UAM. The manage-
ment of vertiports will have a significant impact on the air route network as well as the
layout of communication, navigation, and monitoring stations. UAM will be faced with
more complex integrated operation scenarios involving manned and unmanned vehicles
in terms of traffic rules and operational control. UAM traffic rules must be innovated and
remain compatible with existing air traffic regulations [53]. A high-bandwidth communica-
tion system will allow UAM operational control to move in the direction of autonomous
decision-making and self-piloting based on air–ground coordinates.
Furthermore, the SESAR automation roadmap [43] provides a vision for the future of
ATM and identifies key phases for integrating automation technologies, particularly in light
of the increasing complexity of airspace usage, as well as the integration of new aircraft
types into UAM, including unmanned aerial vehicles and air taxis. The roadmap focuses
on improving the safety, efficiency, and capacity of air traffic systems through automation.
According to SESAR, there are different levels of automation across various aspects of ATM,
ranging from flight planning and departure sequencing to conflict detection and resolution,
in-flight automation, and landing coordination.
Currently, both the FAA and EASA are heavily investing in the integration of UAM
and UAVs into existing ATM systems. Their work focuses on developing air traffic con-
trol systems (e.g., UTM in the U.S. and U-Space in Europe), airspace integration, safety
standards, and certification processes for new aircraft types, such as eVTOL aircraft. Key
efforts include ensuring the safe use of airspace, support for multi-vehicle operations, and
the development of regulatory frameworks to accommodate the growing volume of low-
altitude aviation in urban areas. A new airspace management system is being developed
by the FAA to support UAM operations, which require coordination between manned and
unmanned vehicles, particularly at low altitudes in urban areas. An important aspect of this
process is the development of UAM corridors and vertiports (takeoff and landing zones).
As part of its studies on the integration of UAM vehicles into the national airspace, the FAA
will focus on how eVTOL aircraft and drones interact with traditional aircraft. Both traffic
management and collision avoidance technologies are used to ensure that UAM operations
do not interfere with existing air traffic. The U-Space concept, which is similar to the FAA’s
UTM initiative, is one of the EASA’s key initiatives for the integration of UAM into the
European airspace. It consists of a set of services and procedures that facilitate the safe
integration of drones and electric VTOL aircraft into the European airspace. This framework
supports automated flight management such as conflict detection and resolution, real-time

===== PAGE 11 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 11 of 28
flight tracking, and dynamic airspace management, which are essential for managing the
high volume of UAM vehicles in cities.
2.6. Energy Efficiency
Battery endurance is a significant challenge for electric UAVs and drones because it
imposes severe constraints on their operational time. There are several solutions to improve
the endurance of electric UAVs, such as more efficient rotor configurations, lightweight
materials, and trajectory planning to minimize energy consumption [54]. One of the most
promising approaches to improving electric UAV endurance is carefully planning their
trajectories to minimize energy consumption. This approach can involve flying at lower
altitudes, taking shallower descents, and avoiding obstacles or other sources of drag.
Studies have shown that energy efficiency drops with increased cruise altitude, so flying at
lower altitudes can improve electric UAV endurance [55]. However, it is imperative to note
that optimizing a single factor, such as energy consumption, may result in a suboptimal
solution when other factors, such as safety and community acceptance, are also considered.
Therefore, the design of airspace structures and routes for UAVs should consider the trade-
offs among energy consumption, efficiency, safety, and community acceptance [56]. The
impact of UAM vehicle type on urban aerial transportation requires a thorough assessment
of aerial vehicular systems and different types of vehicles [57]. Generally, all aviation modes
that permit individual or personal mobility are defined as personal aerial vehicles (PAVs).
Some documents refer to PAVs as flying cars or roadable aircrafts. NASA first explicitly
mentioned PAVs within its NASA/LANGLEY projects relating to personal air vehicles
(PAVs) and dual air/road transportation systems (DARTSs) [57]. These vehicles aim to
provide a breakthrough in personal air mobility by reducing travel times and increasing
reach, thereby enhancing the quality of life.
3. Communication Techniques in UAM
Effectively managing multiple aircraft movements in a complex urban environment is
a key challenge in UAM. To address this challenge, it is crucial to develop communication
systems that can facilitate the exchange of information between UAM vehicles, air traffic
control, and ground-based infrastructure, as shown in Figure 7. These systems must
be capable of managing high data volumes, supporting real-time communication, and
remaining resilient to interference and disruptions. A successful UAM solution must
take into account the challenges and differences between various environments, such as
water bodies, rural locations, and urban centers. Line-of-sight (LOS), non-line-of-sight
(NLOS), and blind-line-of-sight (BLOS) links, which experience sporadic obstructions, pose
a greater threat than the current aviation environment [ 58]. Furthermore, accuracy and
latency are key in navigation signaling. The recent surge in interest in air taxis, driven
by ride-sharing services like UBER and Lyft, underscores the need for system robustness,
safety, and connectivity in realizing such services [59].
UAM communication systems must be extremely reliable, secure, accessible, and
satisfy high data integrity standards. While UAM systems exist independently of current
communication systems, commercial objectives require low-cost, lightweight, and power-
efficient customization. Researchers have attempted to improve flight safety and security
with the help of machine learning and artificial intelligence. Services hosted in the cloud are
being studied to ease the cargo delivery process, such as various types of communication
links for essential telemetry data and connectivity, obstacle avoidance systems, and related
sensors [ 60]. Other communication systems include flight control, propulsion, quick
navigation, surveillance, terrain mapping, and emergency landing systems.

===== PAGE 12 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 12 of 28
Drones 2024, 8, 702 12 of 28 
 
 
Figure 7. UAM communication and information ﬂows. 
3.1. Data Type 
A key aspect of the operation of eVTOLs is their connection to communication net-
works. To achieve high data rates, communica tion should be ultra-reliable, secure, and 
low in latency. In addition, passengers should be able to access voice and data networks 
with a stable connection that provides satisfactory quality of service (QoS) [61]. The au-
tonomy of eVTOL communication is another aspect that contributes to its reliability and 
robustness. UAM vehicles have two types of  data: command and control (C2) and non-
C2. As shown in Figure 8, C2 contains information related to ﬂight control, safety systems, 
navigation, and communication. C2 links ensure the safe operation of an eVTOL aircraft 
when it is unmanned [62]. 
 
Figure 8. C2 link in UAM communication. 
This data type is constantly changing because the real-time evaluation of ﬂight oper-
ations for potential aborts will require a signi ﬁcant amount of data from ﬂight system 
diagnostics. The handling and oper ation of aerial vehicles may bene ﬁt from live visuals, 
as they facilitate remote operat ions, for example, through arti ﬁcial intelligence applica-
tions across cloud services. The non-C2 category includes all additional data such as post-
Figure 7. UAM communication and information flows.
3.1. Data Type
A key aspect of the operation of eVTOLs is their connection to communication net-
works. To achieve high data rates, communication should be ultra-reliable, secure, and low
in latency. In addition, passengers should be able to access voice and data networks with a
stable connection that provides satisfactory quality of service (QoS) [61]. The autonomy of
eVTOL communication is another aspect that contributes to its reliability and robustness.
UAM vehicles have two types of data: command and control (C2) and non-C2. As shown
in Figure 8, C2 contains information related to flight control, safety systems, navigation,
and communication. C2 links ensure the safe operation of an eVTOL aircraft when it is
unmanned [62].
Drones 2024, 8, 702 12 of 28 
 
 
Figure 7. UAM communication and information ﬂows. 
3.1. Data Type 
A key aspect of the operation of eVTOLs is their connection to communication net-
works. To achieve high data rates, communica tion should be ultra-reliable, secure, and 
low in latency. In addition, passengers should be able to access voice and data networks 
with a stable connection that provides satisfactory quality of service (QoS) [61]. The au-
tonomy of eVTOL communication is another aspect that contributes to its reliability and 
robustness. UAM vehicles have two types of  data: command and control (C2) and non-
C2. As shown in Figure 8, C2 contains information related to ﬂight control, safety systems, 
navigation, and communication. C2 links ensure the safe operation of an eVTOL aircraft 
when it is unmanned [62]. 
 
Figure 8. C2 link in UAM communication. 
This data type is constantly changing because the real-time evaluation of ﬂight oper-
ations for potential aborts will require a signi ﬁcant amount of data from ﬂight system 
diagnostics. The handling and oper ation of aerial vehicles may bene ﬁt from live visuals, 
as they facilitate remote operat ions, for example, through arti ﬁcial intelligence applica-
tions across cloud services. The non-C2 category includes all additional data such as post-
Figure 8. C2 link in UAM communication.
This data type is constantly changing because the real-time evaluation of flight op-
erations for potential aborts will require a significant amount of data from flight system
diagnostics. The handling and operation of aerial vehicles may benefit from live visuals, as
they facilitate remote operations, for example, through artificial intelligence applications
across cloud services. The non-C2 category includes all additional data such as post-flight
data or passenger information [63]. System design and requirements must consider these
difficulties to offer such a connection for control and non-payload communication (CNPC).

===== PAGE 13 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 13 of 28
The capabilities of the CNPC system are also extended to handle various informational
types, including command messages, target track data, non-payload data, air traffic control
(ATC) voice relay navigation aids, non-payload video downlink (DL) data, air traffic data
relay, and airborne weather radar DL data. The C2 communication connection should also
support secure communication between the aerial vehicle and the control center to provide
secure and dependable UAV flight operations [64].
3.2. Spectrum and Carrier Frequencies
With high-density UAM, the number of devices accessing the spectrum is predicted to
increase significantly in the near future. Furthermore, the RF spectrum capacity approaches
its limits, further exacerbating the issue of spectrum scarcity [65]. Owing to the limited suit-
ability of existing orthogonal multipoint access schemes for future eVTOL networks, several
studies have been conducted on the coexistence of terrestrial and aerial devices such as
UAVs in three-dimensional environments, which can be easily generalized to UAM. There
are two promising multiple-access schemes for UAM communication: non-orthogonal
multiple access (NOMA) and rate-splitting multiple access (RSMA) [66]. Communication
systems experience congestion in their bandwidth and transmission spectrum. For this
reason, UAM communication systems must also utilize modern frequency bands such as
sub-6 GHz, 3GPP bands, millimeter wave (mmWave) bands (24–86 GHz), and aviation
and low-Earth orbit (LEO) bands. Owing to open space and extremely high tropospheric
attenuation, the radio signal range must be reduced to increase the frequency. The highest
bandwidth efficiency and data rates are offered by 5G mmWave systems. However, they
are mostly LOS and have short ranges, making them suitable only for metropolitan areas.
UAM systems must use low data rates in both rural and outlying areas.
3.3. Reliable Communications
Due to their low altitude, aerial vehicles and standard aviation systems, such as heli-
copters, differ significantly in their proximity to structures and barriers on the ground. This
difference creates a communication challenge known as shadowing and obstruction [67].
Because of these effects, a connection may be attenuated to the point of failure. As a result,
several links are required to connect the aircraft to command-and-control stations. Since
air-to-ground communications are more power-efficient and less time-consuming than
satellites and HAPs, they are generally preferred for LOS links [68]. BLOS refers to a link
that can only be accessed using methods other than a ground station (GS), such as other
aerial vehicles, platforms, or satellites. The NLOS scenario is often the most difficult in
terms of power and channel degradation because of multipath components in the envi-
ronment. Although NLOS is an uncommon scenario in UAM, it should be considered
once the UAM is completely distributed. In short, the control and command connections
should be incredibly robust in the face of interference and should recover quickly after a
breakdown. eVTOL aircraft face a number of challenges in terms of connectivity because
of the highly dynamic UAM environment and the large number of obstacles present in
cities. For continuous connectivity, the technology must be able to achieve BLOS com-
munication. Reliable coverage ensures the continuous flow of information needed for
navigation and surveillance [69], paramount for safe operations. Several opportunities exist
for high-coverage and high-reliability communication, such as next-generation cellular
networks, aerial platforms, satellites, RF, and reconfigurable intelligent surfaces (RISs).
A comprehensive analysis of the communication technologies used by UAM is pre-
sented in Table 4. In the table, we provide an explanation of the application scenario for
each communication technology as well as the advantages and limitations associated with
that technology.

===== PAGE 14 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 14 of 28
Table 4. Comparison of communication technologies for UAM.
Category Communication
Technology Link Types Applications Advantages Limitations
Ad hoc networks FANET Aerial-to-aerial (A2A)
and A2G
FANET-based UAM
for communication
and collision
avoidance
Used for inter-vehicle
communication and
localization
Risk of link
disconnection
Cellular networks
Long-term evolution
(LTE)
UAV-to-
infrastructure (U2I)
and A2G
Surveillance and
awareness messages
Low-cost
deployment and
large area coverage
Inter-cell interference
problem and not
suitable for high
density of aerial
vehicles
4G A2G and C2
Surveillance and
communication
between pilot and
unmanned aircraft
system traffic
management (UTM)
Low-cost, reliable,
and allows
connectivity for
beyond visual line of
sight (BVLOS)
situations
Link availability
problem in rural
areas
5G A2G and C2
Suitable for the
large-scale UAM
operation including
control, tracking, and
communication
Low latency, wide
area coverage,
limitless connectivity,
and multi-access
edge
computing-enabled
services
Lack of
short-distance
connections and
limited coverage
6G U2I, A2A, and A2G
Monitoring,
surveillance, and
emergency
management
High-precision
localization and wide
area coverage
Still not tested in real
environment
Wireless
local
area
network
(WLAN)
Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11
series and 2.4 and
5 GHz frequency
brand)
A2A and A2G
Real-time
information
exchange between
aerial vehicles
Cost-effective, high
availability, high
bandwidth, and high
hardware availability
Limited range,
interference, and
high energy
consumption
X-Bee (IEEE 802.15.4
and 2.4 GHz
frequency band)
A2G
Surveillance data
transmission to the
ground station
Longer distance
compared to Wi-Fi Limited data rate
Satellite networks
LEO and
geostationary
equatorial orbit
(GEO)
A2G Useful for BVLOS
situations
Real-time reliable
connectivity, high
area coverage, robust
communication, and
high capacity
Low data rate, not
suitable for
delay-sensitive
applications, and
high complexity
Other networks
Long range (LoRa) A2G and A2A
Pee-to-peer
communication and
surveillance
Mid-level
transmission range
with high throughput
Packet loss happened
when transmission
distance crossed
more than 1 Km
Automatic packet
reporting system
(APRS)
A2G Transmission of
surveillance data
Supports higher
altitudes compared
to 4G and 5G
Low data rate and
congestion may
happen in
high-density aerial
environments
Automatic
dependent
surveillance—
broadcast (ADS-B)
A2G Surveillance and
tracking
Acceptable range and
accuracy Security concern
3.4. Data Rate and Latency
To facilitate rapid data transmission, eVTOL aircraft require high data rates and low-
latency communication links. UAM communications have varying data rate requirements
depending on the application. Low data rates can be used for voice applications and
simple C2 messages. Remote pilot operation (RPO) via video streaming and autonomous
technology has more stringent requirements, exceeding 100 Mb/s [ 70]. Moreover, high
rates are expected for passenger infotainment systems. City bandwidth shortages are

===== PAGE 15 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 15 of 28
the primary obstacle to enabling high data rates. Different frequency ranges, such as
mmWave and terahertz (THz), can be a good solution for achieving high-throughput
communications. UAM requires low latency demands due to eVTOL operations in crowded
cities. To enable RPO and autonomous navigation, latency as low as 10 ms is required [71].
Reducing communication distances and eliminating relays is the key to achieving low-
latency communication. A low-latency connection can be achieved by decentralizing the
communication using sidelink or device-to-device (D2D) technology. In addition, eVTOL
vehicles can fly at very high speeds (300 km/h) and may be partially or entirely autonomous.
The position of an eVTOL must be continuously shared while receiving the positions of
other eVTOLs and other flying platforms, such as drones [72]. Moreover, they should be
continually informed of air traffic, weather, and unexpected occurrences. Thus, a new
air interface technology is required to allow eVTOLs to operate at the required data rate
and latency.
3.5. Communication Zone
Future aviation communication systems will require links with higher throughput
and longer communication distances, which opens up future study areas. Compared
with terrestrial communications, power and spectral efficiency are not important in UAM
settings [73]. To cover long distances, aerial communication regions are often larger than
those of terrestrial communication systems. Since all of the power must be conserved in
aviation stations, as it needs to be distributed among numerous power-consuming systems,
aviation channels are frequently modeled as Rician fading channels, where the Rice factor,
also known as the K-factor, can range from simple additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
to a more complex and distortive Rayleigh fading channel [74].
3.6. Secure Communications
UAM safety and security are among the main concerns in the design of communication
protocols. Because eVTOL aircraft are most likely to operate in urban areas and among
pedestrian traffic, they must be safe not only for people on the ground but also for pilots
and passengers. Secure communication is crucial for UAM operations to prevent the
hacking and jamming of eVTOL aircraft. Malicious hackers can cause disastrous damage
if they gain control over one or more eVTOL aircraft. These consequences could be fatal
for pedestrians, eVTOL vehicles, passengers, and buildings. Various recent technologies,
such as blockchains, machine-learning security algorithms, and quantum computing, can
be used to secure communication [75].
3.7. Network Topology
Multipoint receiver and transmitter schemes can be employed in UAM networks using
centralized or decentralized 5G techniques. Multiple links can also be offered by FANETs,
which often require more sophisticated network-level techniques such as adaptive rout-
ing [76]. The use of high-altitude platforms and satellite communications provides several
connectivity options. C2 connections are expected to have low data rates and bandwidth
due to the type of communication, such as 300 kbps for compressed videos [77]. On the
other hand, non-C2 is often used for complex applications and high-data-rate requirements.
In UAM vehicles, passengers require a throughput equivalent to that of terrestrial networks.
UAM vehicles communicate at 300–600 m via an aerial network hierarchy that includes
geostationary and low-orbit satellites. The altitude of satellites is much higher than that of
HAPs, varying from a few hundred kilometers for LEO to a few thousand kilometers for
GEO. In contrast to HAPs, satellites are located at higher altitudes and their path lengths
are significantly longer. Moreover, the satellite-to-eVTOL link experiences additional losses
related to atmospheric loss, antenna misalignment, and polarization [ 78]. Furthermore,
the altitude of the satellite and the angle between the satellite and the eVTOL also play a
critical role in the design of the satellite-to-eVTOL link. Figure 9 illustrates multi-layered
network topology management and communication. Future UAM networks should be

===== PAGE 16 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 16 of 28
able to adapt to changes in the network topology, environmental dynamics, and evolving
user requirements. Software-defined networks (SDNs) are an effective strategy for coping
with rapid topology changes caused by UAM [79].
Drones 2024, 8, 702 16 of 28 
 
provides several connectivity options. C2 connections are expected to have low data rates 
and bandwidth due to the type of communication, such as 300 kbps for compressed videos 
[77]. On the other hand, non-C2 is often used for complex applications and high-data-rate 
requirements. In UAM vehicles, passengers require a throughput equivalent to that of ter-
restrial networks. UAM vehicles communicate at 300–600 m via an aerial network hierar-
chy that includes geostationary and low-orbit satellites. The altitude of satellites is much 
higher than that of HAPs, varying from a few hundred kilometers for LEO to a few thou-
sand kilometers for GEO. In contrast to HAPs, satellites are located at higher altitudes and 
their path lengths are signi ﬁcantly longer. Moreover, the satellite-to-eVTOL link experi-
ences additional losses related to atmosphe ric loss, antenna misalignment, and polariza-
tion [78]. Furthermore, the altitude of the satellite and the angle between the satellite and 
the eVTOL also play a critical role in the de sign of the satellite-to -eVTOL link. Figure 9 
illustrates multi-layered network topology  management and co mmunication. Future 
UAM networks should be able to adapt to changes in the network topology, environmen-
tal dynamics, and evolving user requirements. Software-deﬁned networks (SDNs) are an 
eﬀective strategy for coping with rapid topology changes caused by UAM [79]. 
 
Figure 9. Multi-layer aerial communication networks. 
3.8. Navigation and Localization 
With an increase in the number of UAM nodes, a high-accuracy positioning system 
is necessary for situational awareness and self-awareness. UAM operations require robust 
tracking algorithms and fusion sensors, which provide accurate information and posi-
tional awareness. The authors of [80] pointed out that current global navigation satellite 
systems (GNSSs), including GPS, Galileo, the quasi-zenith satellite system (QZSS), and 
the global navigation satellite system (GLONASS), can be improved to improve the accu-
racy of UAM navigation systems. Since GNSS s were created for LOS situations, they are 
better suited to moderately populated metrop olitan regions. According to [81], the 
Figure 9. Multi-layer aerial communication networks.
3.8. Navigation and Localization
With an increase in the number of UAM nodes, a high-accuracy positioning system is
necessary for situational awareness and self-awareness. UAM operations require robust
tracking algorithms and fusion sensors, which provide accurate information and positional
awareness. The authors of [80] pointed out that current global navigation satellite systems
(GNSSs), including GPS, Galileo, the quasi-zenith satellite system (QZSS), and the global
navigation satellite system (GLONASS), can be improved to improve the accuracy of UAM
navigation systems. Since GNSSs were created for LOS situations, they are better suited to
moderately populated metropolitan regions. According to [81], the combination of all the
stated technologies will provide multiband, multimode receivers with high accuracy, but
their price is too high for low-cost commercial applications.
For challenging environments devoid of LOS, the authors of [82] use 5G new radio
(NR) at frequencies ranging from 450 to 6000 MHz and 24.25–52.6 GHz to investigate a
hybrid alternative to GNSS. To achieve positional awareness with high precision even
in richly distributed NLOS fading channels, the authors of [ 83] assessed six carrierless
mmWave waveform types using impulse radio (IR) and deduced a comparison of range
accuracy with multiple carriers. In the experiment, they employed an energy detector
with a threshold that has low computing complexity and offers decent range accuracy
rather than outstanding accuracy, such as provided by a correlation detector. The authors
discussed these waveform options for 5G NR cellular network D2D communications and
vehicle location. As discussed in [84], none of the systems suggested any implementation
that ensures 99.99% uptime anywhere under any condition; therefore, hybrid techniques
are considered the most effective navigation solution.

===== PAGE 17 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 17 of 28
Communication, navigation, and surveillance (CNS) facilities on the ground are
important components of UAM. CNS provides technical support for UAM traffic operations.
Compared with transport aviation, UAM requires vehicles to operate at a higher traffic
density. The emergence of 5G communication technology may be crucial for solving
CNS problems, as indicated in Table 5. There is insufficient airspace coverage from the
base stations on the ground. UAM transport requires improvements in the selection of
ground base stations and antenna layout (such as adjusting antenna radiation direction,
transmission power, and signal gain) to achieve comprehensive coverage of urban low-
altitude airspace. Table 5 compares CNS requirements for traditional air transportation and
UAM. Various sensors and techniques can be used for localization, often in combination, to
improve accuracy and robustness. A few common technologies used for localization are
inertial measurement units (IMUs), light detection and ranging (LIDAR) systems, and GPS.
Some commonly used localization techniques are visual odometry (VO), simultaneous
localization and mapping (SLAM), beacon-based localization, RF localization, particle
filters, and Kalman filters [85]. There is a significant difference between VO and SLAM
in that VO focuses primarily on local consistency and aims to incrementally estimate the
path of the camera/UAV position after a change in position, as well as possibly optimize
local parameters. However, SLAM aims to achieve a globally consistent estimate of the
camera/UAV trajectory.
Table 5. Comparison of CNS requirements for traditional air transportation and UAM.
Service Traditional Air Transportation UAM
Communication
Aircraft communication addressing and reporting
system, very high frequency (VHF) ground-to-air data
communications link.
Ground base stations provide 5G communication
networks and onboard ad hoc network
communication.
Navigation
Very high-frequency omni-range, distance measuring
equipment, and non-directional beacons are used for
navigation purposes. The navigation station provides
radio navigation, and the instrument landing system
provides landing guidance. GNSS and IMU provide
combined navigation systems.
GNSS and IMU-integrated navigation, urban
domain space high-resolution three-dimensional
(3D) map service, location-based routing
services, and online visual recognition-aided
positioning are used for navigation.
Monitoring
There are three types of radar surveillance: primary
radar, secondary radar, and automatic dependent
surveillance–broadcast technology.
Ground-based 5G communication links,
centralized cooperation related to monitoring,
and FANET communication.
Regulatory
In the radar control station, the process is directed by the
controller sequence according to the route, approach,
airport, and area.
Autonomous flight ground control, centralized
control scheduling, and manual responsibility
for emergency response and surveillance.
Flight information
Provide air traffic service, automatic information
broadcast service—communication information includes
the airport and route meteorological conditions.
Airspace traffic information, vertical takeoffs and
landings, airport slot status, detailed
meteorological information for urban and rural
areas, and route stream information.
Emergency system
When an aircraft is in an emergency situation, the
control units alert the airspace service, based on a
secondary-mode answering machine code
warning system.
Advertising throughout all airspace via the 5G
network, on-board equipment takes action when
a fault is detected.
3.9. Collision Detect-and-Avoid (CDAA) Systems
Utilizing terrestrial CDAA for typical UAS terminal area operations is required to
integrate UAS into urban and near-urban airspaces. The ground station should know all
planned flights and their paths as well as the current airborne flight locations and flight
paths. Aerial vehicles should also be able to communicate with the GS and relay the coordi-
nates of other UAS in the operating vicinity. Advanced driver assistance systems (ADASs)
with forward-collision warning tools are used in the context of autonomous ground vehi-
cles. These systems use sensors such as radar, cameras, laser imaging, and LIDAR to enable

===== PAGE 18 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 18 of 28
semi-autonomous driving in autonomous mode [ 86]. In the aviation industry, aircraft
collision avoidance systems are commonly referred to as ACAS or TCAS [87]. An ACAS
is used in aviation to prevent mid-air collisions between aircraft. It provides real-time
warnings and instructions to pilots to avoid collisions with other aircraft. TCAS is a specific
subset of ACAS. In commercial aviation, this system monitors the airspace around the
aircraft and alerts pilots to potential traffic conflicts, which are followed by maneuvering
instructions to avoid a collision.
Frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FMCW) radars are employed in CDAA
systems on ground vehicles and may be implemented in UAM. The authors of [88] studied
the ghost target scenario caused by FMCW radar-to-radar interference. ADASs with
forward collision warning tools are used in new autonomous vehicles to reduce interference.
This system uses sensors, such as radar, cameras, and LIDAR, to enable semi-autonomous
driving in automobiles. To reduce interference, the authors of [ 89] suggested altering
the chirp slope in the time–frequency domain (DTF). These systems are appropriate in
situations with a high likelihood of a UAV-to-UAV collision, the avoidance of which
is made possible by cutting-edge interference-mitigation methods. With the goals of
standard compliance and dual-radar and communication functions for UAM, chirp signals
are created for DFT-s-orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) as frequency–
domain spectral shaping using Bessel functions and Fresnel integrals.
The authors of [90] propose a Markov decision process (MDP)-based method called
FastMDP for collision avoidance in urban air mobility. The authors demonstrated that
FastMDP outperformed other collision avoidance algorithms in terms of safety and com-
putational efficiency, even when the aircraft had imperfect knowledge of each other’s
intentions. In the FastMDP , the initial aircraft state and the limits that must be maintained
are the states, and the aircraft defines the corresponding action. A reward is defined by
the reachable states for each action over the time horizon to address the challenge of safely
managing multiple eVTOL aircraft in congested urban areas for efficient and on-demand
air transportation. In [91], the authors proposed a computational guidance algorithm with
collision avoidance capability, formulated as an MDP , and solved it using a Monte Carlo
tree search algorithm. Their experimental results show that the proposed algorithm per-
forms better than the optimal reciprocal collision avoidance strategy in reducing conflicts
and mid-air collisions.
3.10. Routing
UAM vehicles move at very high speeds, causing frequent network topology changes,
as illustrated in Figure 10, which can make routing a challenging task because previously
available routes may no longer be valid. To address this challenge, researchers have pro-
posed several routing algorithms and protocols specifically designed for UAM networks.
Recently proposed algorithms and protocols consider the dynamic nature of the network
and aim to find the most efficient route from one node to another [92]. Since technology
has advanced and GPS locations can be tracked, several location-aware dynamic routing
algorithms have been proposed in recent years. By using location-aware routing models,
real-time solutions have been developed, including aerial vehicle operation, vehicle loca-
tion, vehicle charging and maintenance requirements, and customer characteristics (e.g.,
pick-up/drop-off location, pickup time, willingness to rideshare, and number of passen-
gers). Moreover, high-performance computing is required to supervise UAM operations
and provide navigation services to eVTOL vehicles [ 93]. Utilizing modern networking
technologies, such as cloud/fog computing, edge computing, and digital twins, UAM can
access large amounts of computing power without onboarding expensive hardware.

===== PAGE 19 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 19 of 28
Drones 2024, 8, 702 19 of 28 
 
performs better than the optimal reciprocal collision avoidance strategy in reducing con-
flicts and mid-air collisions. 
3.10. Routing 
UAM vehicles move at very high  speeds, causing frequent network topology 
changes, as illustrated in Figure 10, which can make routing a challenging task because 
previously available routes may no longer be valid. To address this challenge, researchers 
have proposed several routing algorithms and protocols specifically designed for UAM 
networks. Recently proposed algorithms and protocols consider the dynamic nature of 
the network and aim to find the most efficient route from one node to another [92]. Since 
technology has advanced and GPS locati ons can be tracked, several location -aware dy-
namic routing algorithms have been proposed in recent years. By using location -aware 
routing models, real-time solutions have been developed, including aerial vehicle opera-
tion, vehicle location, vehicle chargin g and maintenance requirements, and customer 
characteristics (e.g., pick-up/drop-off location, pickup time, willingness to rideshare, and 
number of passengers). Moreover, high-performance computing is required to supervise 
UAM operations and provide navigation services to eVTOL vehicles [93]. Utilizing mod-
ern networking technologies, such as cloud/fog computing, edge computing, and digital 
twins, UAM can access large amounts of computing power without onboarding expensive 
hardware. 
 
Figure 10. Mobility effect on UAM communication. 
3.11. Path Planning and Mission Planning 
In path planning, an algorithm determines the path or trajectory that a flying vehicle 
should follow from its current position to a specific goal or destination while avoiding 
obstacles and following certain parameters. A path planning algorithm considers the dy-
namics of the vehicle; the environment, including obstacles; the terrain; and other relevant 
factors to determine the most efficient and collision-free route. Path planning aims to de-
termine a feasible and safe trajectory that guides the vehicle from beginning to end, while 
optimizing parameters such as time, energy consumption , and smoothness. Three main 
algorithms are used in UAM path planning: graph-searching algorithms, sampling-based 
Figure 10. Mobility effect on UAM communication.
3.11. Path Planning and Mission Planning
In path planning, an algorithm determines the path or trajectory that a flying vehicle
should follow from its current position to a specific goal or destination while avoiding
obstacles and following certain parameters. A path planning algorithm considers the
dynamics of the vehicle; the environment, including obstacles; the terrain; and other
relevant factors to determine the most efficient and collision-free route. Path planning
aims to determine a feasible and safe trajectory that guides the vehicle from beginning
to end, while optimizing parameters such as time, energy consumption, and smoothness.
Three main algorithms are used in UAM path planning: graph-searching algorithms,
sampling-based search algorithms, and meta-heuristic algorithms [ 94,95]. The first are
foundational algorithms such as Dijkstra and A* algorithms. The second category includes
probabilistic algorithms, such as the probabilistic roadmap method (PRM), and rapidly
exploring random trees (RRTs). The third category comprises algorithms derived from
natural or bioinspired algorithms, such as evolutionary and swarm intelligence.
Alternatively, mission planning involves defining and organizing a set of tasks or
objectives that must be accomplished for an autonomous system to accomplish a spe-
cific objective. To accomplish its mission successfully, the flying vehicle must identify
the sequence of actions, waypoints, and goals that need to be followed [ 96]. A mission
plan consists of multiple aspects, including planning for individual segments, allocating
tasks, managing resources, and coordinating multiple vehicles or agents, as necessary. It
optimizes the allocation of resources and tasks to achieve the end goal of the mission in
the shortest possible time. Figure 11 illustrates the various factors that are considered in
mission planning.

===== PAGE 20 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 20 of 28
Drones 2024, 8, 702 20 of 28 
 
search algorithms, and meta-heuristic algorithms [94,95]. The ﬁrst are foundational algo-
rithms such as Dijkstra and A* algorithms. The second category includes probabilistic al-
gorithms, such as the probabilistic roadmap method (PRM), and rapidly exploring ran-
dom trees (RRTs). The third category comprises algorithms derived from natural or bio-
inspired algorithms, such as evolutionary and swarm intelligence. 
Alternatively, mission planning involves de ﬁning and organizing a set of tasks or 
objectives that must be accomplished for an autonomous system to accomplish a speci ﬁc 
objective. To accomplish its mission successfully, the ﬂying vehicle must identify the se-
quence of actions, waypoints, and goals that need to be followed [96]. A mission plan con-
sists of multiple aspects, including planning for individual segments, allocating tasks, 
managing resources, and coordina ting multiple vehicles or agents, as necessary. It opti-
mizes the allocation of resources and tasks to achieve the end goal of the mission in the 
shortest possible time. Figure 11 illustrates the various factors that are considered in mis-
sion planning. 
 
Figure 11. Overview of UAM mission planning. 
3.12. Flight Scheduling 
Unlike traditional aircraft, eVTOLs are constrained by their battery life, which limits 
their ﬂight time and makes it di ﬃcult to preschedule their arrivals. To address this chal-
lenge, researchers have proposed several methods for scheduling eVTOL arrivals at verti-
ports, equivalent to an airport for UAM. Vertiport has facilities for customer pickup or 
drop-oﬀ, charging, maintenance, and several docking stations for aerial vehicles [97]. 
Scheduling methods include position shif ting, dynamic progra mming, branch-and-
bound, branch-and-price, and data spli tting, as well as various heuristic algorithms [98]. 
However, these methods are not speciﬁcally designed to consider the eVTOL constraints. 
These constraints include limited battery life, airport capacity, and remaining fuel. There-
fore, there is a need for further research on this topic to develop models and algorithms 
tailored explicitly to the scheduling of eVTOL arrivals at vertiports. 
4. Opportunities and Challenges 
Although the UAM mission is to provide safe, sustainable, economical, and accessi-
ble transportation, it faces obstacles such as public acceptance and public safety. The de-
ployment of UAM can be made easier if there are several lucrative operating criteria, in-
cluding ﬂying limits over residential areas, nighttime operations, inclement weather, and 
the development of green technologies. Furthermore, to build infrastructure and scale op-
erations, both the private sector and the go vernment must cooperate and invest signi ﬁ-
cantly in the development of VTOL vehicles and UAM. Future research, strategic planning 
and implementation, and an analysis of UAM implications are necessary to balance eco-
nomic interests, technological progress, and the public good. 
Figure 11. Overview of UAM mission planning.
3.12. Flight Scheduling
Unlike traditional aircraft, eVTOLs are constrained by their battery life, which limits
their flight time and makes it difficult to preschedule their arrivals. To address this challenge,
researchers have proposed several methods for scheduling eVTOL arrivals at vertiports,
equivalent to an airport for UAM. Vertiport has facilities for customer pickup or drop-off,
charging, maintenance, and several docking stations for aerial vehicles [97]. Scheduling
methods include position shifting, dynamic programming, branch-and-bound, branch-
and-price, and data splitting, as well as various heuristic algorithms [98]. However, these
methods are not specifically designed to consider the eVTOL constraints. These constraints
include limited battery life, airport capacity, and remaining fuel. Therefore, there is a need
for further research on this topic to develop models and algorithms tailored explicitly to
the scheduling of eVTOL arrivals at vertiports.
4. Opportunities and Challenges
Although the UAM mission is to provide safe, sustainable, economical, and acces-
sible transportation, it faces obstacles such as public acceptance and public safety. The
deployment of UAM can be made easier if there are several lucrative operating criteria,
including flying limits over residential areas, nighttime operations, inclement weather, and
the development of green technologies. Furthermore, to build infrastructure and scale oper-
ations, both the private sector and the government must cooperate and invest significantly
in the development of VTOL vehicles and UAM. Future research, strategic planning and
implementation, and an analysis of UAM implications are necessary to balance economic
interests, technological progress, and the public good.
The safety of aircraft and humans must be ensured during UAM operations. Despite
the considerable advantages of UAM, there are also a number of limitations, such as the
difficulty of maintaining safe flight at low altitudes, the need to avoid hazards such as colli-
sions, and the effects of weather. The UAM flight trajectory is also significantly complicated
in urban areas due to the presence of high-rise buildings. As a result of these factors, UAM
implementation is very challenging in urban areas. Therefore, collision avoidance in UAM
may be an exciting area of future research [99]. There are several challenges and obstacles
to UAM’s development, including those related to safety and air traffic control regulations,
noise, public acceptance, weather conditions, environmental impacts, infrastructure, and
security [100,101]. With the help of air traffic services (ATS), future research could focus
on developing dynamic routing algorithms that balance customer waiting times, vehicle
idle times, and travel costs. Table 6 addresses many possible roadblocks that could prevent
widespread UAM adoption, and some solutions to overcome them. Several ongoing re-
search projects in collaboration with regulatory bodies focus on airspace integration [102].
There have been limited advancements in infrastructure, thorough city integration analyses,

===== PAGE 21 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 21 of 28
and economic evaluations. Operational and infrastructural development requirements are
also major concerns in the implementation of UAM.
Table 6. The challenges of a UAM system and potential mitigation strategies.
Challenges Threats Probable Mitigation Strategy
ATM
Ensure safe flight, takeoff, and landing
with other aerial vehicles.
Low-level and uncontrolled air space.
Federal aviation act (FAA) for ATM regulation and policy.
Concept of operations guidelines by FAA.
Environmental
impacts
Weather hazards pose safety risks and
sensitivity to passengers and vehicles.
Decrease in vehicle size poses a
significant threat to aircraft.
Vehicles with different capabilities suited for a variety of
weather conditions and climates.
Safety procedures and emergency safety protocols.
Shifting trips from UAM to other modes during travel
disruption due to weather hazards.
Infrastructure
Need for stations for a network of
vertiports; charging or fueling;
communications, navigation,
surveillance, and information technology
infrastructure.
Storage of batteries in the ground to manage the power grid.
Different facilities based on demand and density.
Water resources for water landing aircraft and reducing
development of ground infrastructure.
Privacy
Non-consensual photos, videos, or
surveillance of people on the ground
Privacy of user trip data.
Legislating for regulations and standards on data handling
and UAM services protecting consumer data.
Safety
Personal safety.
Operational safety.
Cyber and physical threats such as
sabotage and attack.
Passenger rating system and background checks.
Individual compartments and emergency response
protocols for pre-, mid-, and post-flight incidents.
Develop strategies and standards for communication,
navigation, and surveillance to provide system redundancy.
Noise Noise from aircraft and scale operations.
Flight operations at high altitudes.
Time restrictions and path deviations to avoid sensitive
areas such as schools and hospitals.
4.1. ATM System
A critical component of UTM and ATM is the exchange of information. However,
ATC, ATM, and UTM are unable to exchange geofencing information because there are
no common standards or protocols. As a result, research efforts should be devoted to
identifying a method for facilitating the exchange of critical information between the
UTM and ATM. UTM can be implemented in each geographical region, where these UTM
systems communicate and exchange information in various scenarios, including when an
aerial vehicle moves between regions to accomplish its goals. Due to the lack of compatible
communication protocols and compliance with common standards among these UTM
systems, interoperability poses a significant problem.
4.2. Air Space Management
Centralized systems with centralized decision-making are commonly used in UTM
architectures. However, a single point of failure can pose a performance challenge for
centralized systems. Aerial vehicles can experience abrupt and rapid changes in their
behavior and motion due to a variety of factors including weather conditions, technical
malfunctions, pilot errors, and unexpected events. A decentralized system can be used
to overcome the limitations of centralized-based UTM. Decentralized UTM systems face
several challenges including safety, interoperability, conflict management, and response
times. Additionally, if communication between aerial vehicles is lost or disrupted, there is
a risk of collisions. Considering this situation, it is important to determine whether a UTM
system should be decentralized, hybrid, centralized, or completely distributed. To evaluate
and compare these UAM concepts, focusing initially on network--specific metrics, the
authors of [103] proposed a framework that uses common performance metrics, inspired by

===== PAGE 22 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 22 of 28
existing transportation systems. UAM network management concepts, namely slot-based,
trajectory-based, and corridor-based approaches, have been provided.
4.3. Communication Reliability
Several technologies have been evaluated to determine the most effective communica-
tion link technologies for UAM. There is a real risk of collisions if links are dropped due to
sudden high demand or if C2 links fail. Cellular networks need to be improved to make
aerial vehicle communication more effective. Link disconnection problems can be miti-
gated by using redundant communication systems. Moreover, non-terrestrial and terrestrial
network integration can provide better communication services for UAM applications.
4.4. Network Management
Researchers have made considerable efforts to develop 5G technology; however, com-
munication services for UAM continue to be unsatisfactory. Three-dimensional movement
in UAM, frequency handovers, and other networking factors make UAM communica-
tion more challenging [104,105]. A list of the networking and communication factors is
presented in Table 7.
Table 7. Communication and networking challenges in UAM.
Technology Advantages Limitations
Cellular network Currently, cellular networks, such as 5G, offer high data
rates, low transmission delays, and support high mobility.
Due to the downward tilt of the antennas on existing
mobile towers, they are unsuitable for UAM
connectivity.
UAVs and HAPs UAVs and HAPs offer large-area coverage and reliable
communication and navigation for UAM.
The dense deployment of UAVs in urban areas poses a
safety concern because of the possibility of collisions.
HAPs links can be affected by rain attenuation.
LEO satellites LEO satellites can provide near-continuous connectivity
and navigation, and a long service time of up to 15 years.
Costly and require a large constellation, which leads to
issues such as Doppler effects, fading, and rapid
handovers.
NOMA
High-spectrum efficiency using the same resources
(frequency) results in lower delays, because users are not
required to wait for a slot before sending data.
A complex receiver and decoding process add
additional delays, making it unsuitable for C2 links.
RSMA Users can simultaneously send data by using multiple
access techniques.
The complexity of the system increases with the
number of users.
RIS Increasing UAM connectivity through better coverage of
BLOS communication in urban areas.
Channel state information is required to operate, but
flying vehicles have a high level of mobility in a 3D
environment. Further, RISs are subject to propagation
and processing delays, which make them unsuitable
for C2 communication.
Sidelink (D2D)
Allows distributed and decentralized multihop
communication for flying vehicles. Moreover, sidelink
provides a high data rate, throughput, and minimum delay.
Limited transmission range.
SDN With SDN, UAM networks are highly scalable and easy
to manage.
Virtualization of networks based on SDN faces
security challenges.
mmWave
mmWave requires small antennae due to short-wave
frequencies and allows higher bandwidth and data rates
than RF.
Highly directional beamforming technology is required
due to the strong attraction of high frequencies.
THz wave High data rate and bandwidth. Development is at an early stage and is limited by path
loss and range.
Cloud and fog computing
UAM requires end-to-end path planning and weather
information; in such cases flying vehicles utilize
delay-tolerant clouds and fog computing for computation.
It is challenging to locate high-speed flying vehicles.
Edge computing
Edge computing is a distributed computing service that
solves handover and offloading problems for
flying vehicles.
A dense deployment of edge servers is required to
provide this service.
Digital twin
Digital twins enable UAM simulations to optimize route
planning, collision avoidance, and mission planning for
UAM communication.
Currently, digital twins are not feasible for large-scale
UAM networks because of their large data
requirements.

===== PAGE 23 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 23 of 28
4.5. Weather
Weather influence is a significant challenge in UAM operations. Aerial vehicles are
subject to disruptions primarily caused by wind and in-path obstacles [ 106]. Weather
conditions are more critical for UAM than for large aircraft. A variety of weather conditions
can severely reduce the visibility of UAM, such as fog, haze, dust storms, rain, snow, and
glare, making driving difficult. Sensor data are prone to disturbances, particularly during
bad weather conditions. The UAM must be able to acquire and identify surrounding
environmental information in real time and dynamically to make accurate judgments in
different weather environments. Moreover, the flight status of other flying vehicles must be
exchanged in real time. A UAM system’s perception of the environment, whether good or
bad, is comparable to that of a human, as it is related to the goal and objective of ensuring
safe driving.
4.6. Noise
The success or failure of a UAM vehicle concept is also significantly influenced by
the requirement for minimal noise emissions, which is a significant concern in terms of
public acceptance. According to a survey on how the public perceives UAM, the majority
expressed serious anxiety regarding the type and amount of noise generated by UAM. To
the greatest extent feasible, UAM noise characteristics should be integrated into the current
urban background soundscape to secure community acceptability. Blade tip speed is a
crucial design factor that must be as low as is feasible. Potential solutions include spreading
thrust generation across several rotors, reducing the weight, and increasing the rotor area.
The latter runs counter to the requirement that aerial vehicles be as small as feasible to
accommodate the constrained space and architecture in cities. Given the limited space
available, this requirement suggests that aircraft size may be the limiting factor for the high
data rate between UAM and its stations in urban areas [107].
4.7. Social Factors
Despite aiming to provide safe, sustainable, inexpensive, and accessible mobility,
UAM must address concerns including societal equality, public acceptability of noise, and
safety. UAM implementation may be made easier with demonstration projects, operating
standards, limits on flying over residential areas at night, and inclement weather conditions.
However, many challenges remain. Additionally, efforts should be made to examine the
social and economic effects of UAM on local communities and to solve inequality issues.
Testing for the integration of UAM in the same airspace as regular flights, safety and
health effects, identification of data requirements, public perception, and best practices
for multimodal integration and vertiport design are a few possible areas for further study.
Moreover, further studies could concentrate on market entry strategies, commercial model-
ing, pertinent certification steps, the UAM environment, sensor and actuator developments,
design challenges, technological requirements, and implications for the operational concept
to drive UAM systems forward.
5. Conclusions
A revolutionary era of aeronautical communication began with the advent of UAM. In
this article, we discussed the role of UAM in future mobility systems for the development
of sustainable smart cities. Some key requirements must be satisfied for the successful
deployment of UAM technologies. In particular, high-speed and high-accuracy data com-
munication and mid-air vehicle-to-vehicle communication techniques are being developed.
Simultaneously, each of these technologies requires high reliability and robustness. In
densely populated areas, UAM systems require the overcoming of security and integration
barriers, precise navigation and surveillance capabilities, vehicle-to-vehicle interactions,
CDAA capabilities, and the management of communication failures. This paper discussed
various aspects of UAM operational concepts and communication techniques. Moreover,
our study analyzed in depth the key enabling technologies of UAM for communication

===== PAGE 24 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 24 of 28
and networking. Our study examined a number of challenges related to UAM develop-
ment, including operational scenarios, ATM, routing, high-quality communication services,
navigation, collision detection, path planning, weather effects, and noise control. At the
end of the paper, we discussed future research directions for UAM deployment, and open
research issues and challenges. Lastly, UAM can be successfully integrated into a smart
living community when the public is involved, and most users consent to its daily use.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.Y.A.; methodology, M.Y.A.; validation, M.Y.A. and
S.P .; investigation, M.Y.A. and S.P .; resources, M.Y.A.; writing—original draft preparation, M.Y.A.;
writing—review and editing, M.Y.A. and S.P .; supervision, S.P .; project administration, S.P .; funding
acquisition, S.P . All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by research grants from Chosun University in 2023.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank EunSang Bak at Chosun University for his
detailed comments in helping improve the presentation of this article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Turok, I. Urbanisation and development. In The Routledge Companion to Planning in the Global South; Routledge: London, UK, 2017;
pp. 93–103. [CrossRef]
2. Kelly, F.J.; Fussell, J.C. Air Pollution and Public Health: Emerging Hazards and improved understanding of risk.Environ. Geochem.
Health 2015, 37, 631–649. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Schubert, D.; Sys, C.; Vanelslander, T.; Roumboutsos, A. No-Queue Road Pricing: A comprehensive policy instrument for Europe?
Util. Policy 2022, 78, 101413. [CrossRef]
4. Biswas, K.; Ghazzai, H.; Sboui, L.; Massoud, Y. Urban Air Mobility: An IoT Perspective. IEEE Internet Things Mag. 2023, 6,
122–128. [CrossRef]
5. Vongvit, R.; Maeng, K.; Lee, S.C. Effects of Trust and Customer Perceived Value on the Acceptance of Urban Air Mobility as
Public Transportation. Travel Behav. Soc. 2024, 36, 100788. [CrossRef]
6. Cohen, A.; Shaheen, S.; Farrar, E. Urban Air Mobility: History, Ecosystem, Market Potential, and Challenges. IEEE Trans. Intell.
Transp. Syst. 2021, 22, 6074–6087. [CrossRef]
7. Al-Rubaye, S.; Tsourdos, A.; Namuduri, K. Advanced Air Mobility Operation and Infrastructure for Sustainable Connected
eVTOL Vehicle. Drones 2023, 7, 319. [CrossRef]
8. Goyal, R.; Cohen, A. Advanced Air Mobility: Opportunities and Challenges Deploying eVTOLs for Air Ambulance Service. Appl.
Sci. 2022, 12, 1183. [CrossRef]
9. Alam, M.M.; Arafat, M.Y.; Moh, S.; Shen, J. Topology control algorithms in multi-unmanned aerial vehicle networks: An extensive
survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2022, 207, 103495. [CrossRef]
10. Gordo, V .; Becerra, I.; Fransoy, A.; Ventas, E.; Menendez-Ponte, P .; Xu, Y.; Tojal, M.; Perez-Castan, J.; Perez Sanz, L. A Layered
Structure Approach to Assure Urban Air Mobility Safety and Efficiency.Aerospace 2023, 10, 609. [CrossRef]
11. Rajendran, S.; Srinivas, S. Air Taxi Service for Urban Mobility: A Critical Review of Recent Developments, Future Challenges,
and Opportunities. Transp. Res. Part E-Logist. Transp. Rev. 2020, 143, 102090. [CrossRef]
12. Cohen, A.; Shaheen, S. Urban Air Mobility: Opportunities and obstacles. In International Encyclopedia of Transportation; Elsevier:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2021; pp. 702–709. [CrossRef]
13. Sinha, P .; Chowdhury, M.M.; Guvenc, I.; Matolak, D.W.; Namuduri, K. Wireless connectivity and localization for Advanced Air
Mobility Services. IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag. 2024, 39, 4–14. [CrossRef]
14. Arafat, M.Y.; Moh, S. A Q-Learning-Based Topology-Aware Routing Protocol for Flying Ad Hoc Networks.IEEE Internet Things J.
2021, 9, 1985–2000. [CrossRef]
15. Arafat, M.Y.; Poudel, S.; Moh, S. Medium Access Control Protocols for Flying Ad Hoc Networks: A Review. IEEE Sens. J. 2021, 21,
4097–4121. [CrossRef]
16. Arafat, M.Y.; Moh, S. Routing Protocols for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Networks: A Survey.IEEE Access 2019, 7, 99694–99720.
[CrossRef]
17. Morshed Alam, M.; Moh, S. Joint optimization of trajectory control, task offloading, and resource allocation in air-ground
integrated networks. IEEE Internet Things J. 2024, 11, 24273–24288. [CrossRef]
18. Bine, L.M.S.; Svaigen, A.R.R.; Boukerche, A.; Aylon, L.B.R.; Loureiro, A.A.F. Flavors of the Next Generation of Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles Networks. IEEE Internet Things J. 2024, 11, 24604–24620. [CrossRef]
19. Guo, J.; Chen, L.; Na, X.; Vlacic, L. Advanced Air Mobility: An Innovation for Future Diversified Transportation and Society.
IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. 2024, 9, 3106–3110. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 25 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 25 of 28
20. Pan, G.; Alouini, M.-S. Flying Car Transportation System: Advances, Techniques, and Challenges.IEEE Access 2021, 9, 24586–24603.
[CrossRef]
21. Schweiger, K.; Schmitz, R.; Knabe, F. Impact of Wind on eVTOL Operations and Implications for Vertiport Airside Traffic Flows:
A Case Study of Hamburg and Munich. Drones 2023, 7, 464. [CrossRef]
22. Zhang, J.; Liu, Y.; Yao, Z. Overall eVTOL Aircraft Design for Advanced Air Mobility.Green Energy Intell. Transp. 2024, 3, 100150.
[CrossRef]
23. Rendon, M.A.; Sánchez, C.D.; Gallo, J.; Anzai, A.H. Aircraft Hybrid-Electric Propulsion: Development Trends, Challenges and
Opportunities. J. Control Autom. Electr. Syst. 2021, 32, 1244–1268. [CrossRef]
24. Qu, W.; Xu, C.; Tan, X.; Tang, A.; He, H.; Liao, X. Preliminary Concept of Urban Air Mobility Traffic Rules.Drones 2023, 7, 54.
[CrossRef]
25. Arafat, M.Y.; Moh, S. Localization and Clustering Based on Swarm Intelligence in UAV Networks for Emergency Communications.
IEEE Internet Things J. 2019, 6, 8958–8976. [CrossRef]
26. Wang, S.; Zhang, X.; Zhai, Y.; Zheng, L.; Liu, B. Enhancing Navigation Integrity for Urban Air Mobility with Redundant Inertial
Sensors. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2022, 126, 107631. [CrossRef]
27. Bauranov, A.; Rakas, J. Designing Airspace for Urban Air Mobility: A Review of Concepts and Approaches. Prog. Aerosp. Sci.
2021, 125, 100726. [CrossRef]
28. Arafat, M.Y.; Pan, S. The new paradigm of safe and sustainable transportation: Urban Air Mobility. In Frontier Computing on
Industrial Applications Volume 3; Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering; Springer: Singapore, 2024; pp. 347–352. [CrossRef]
29. Wang, L.; Deng, X.; Gui, J.S.; Jiang, P .; Wan, S. A Review of Urban Air Mobility-Enabled Intelligent Transportation Systems:
Mechanisms, Applications and Challenges. J. Syst. Archit. 2023, 141, 102902. [CrossRef]
30. Kasliwal, A.; Kasliwal, A.; Furbush, N.J.; Furbush, N.J.; Gawron, J.H.; McBride, J.R.; Wallington, T.J.; De Kleine, R.; Kim, H.C.;
Keoleian, G.A. Role of Flying Cars in Sustainable Mobility. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1555. [CrossRef]
31. Straubinger, A.; Rothfeld, R.; Shamiyeh, M.; Büchter, K.-D.; Kaiser, J.; Plötner, K. An Overview of Current Research and
Developments in Urban Air Mobility—Setting the Scene for UAM Introduction. J. Air Transp. Manag. 2020, 87, 101852. [CrossRef]
32. Coppola, P .; De Fabiis, F.; Silvestri, F. Urban Air Mobility (UAM): Airport Shuttles or City-Taxis?Transp. Policy 2024, 150, 24–34.
[CrossRef]
33. Cokorilo, O. Urban Air Mobility: Safety Challenges. Transp. Res. Procedia 2020, 45, 21–29. [CrossRef]
34. Misra, A.; Jayachandran, S.; Kenche, S.; Katoch, A.; Suresh, A.; Gundabattini, E.; Selvaraj, S.K.; Legesse, A.A. A review on Vertical
Take-off and landing (VTOL) tilt-rotor and Tilt Wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (uavs).J. Eng. 2022, 2022, 1803638. [CrossRef]
35. Jin, Z.; Ng, K.K.H.; Zhang, C.; Wu, L.; Li, A. Integrated Optimisation of Strategic Planning and Service Operations for Urban Air
Mobility Systems. Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 2024, 183, 104059. [CrossRef]
36. Zeng, L.; Hu, J.; Pan, D.; Shao, X. Automated Design Optimization of a Mono Tiltrotor in Hovering and Cruising States. Energies
2020, 13, 1155. [CrossRef]
37. Wilke, G. Quieter and Greener Rotorcraft: Concurrent Aerodynamic and Acoustic Optimization. CEAS Aeronaut. J. 2021, 12,
495–508. [CrossRef]
38. Qiao, Z.; Wang, D.; Xu, J.; Pei, X.; Su, W.; Wang, D.; Bai, Y. A Comprehensive Design and Experiment of a Biplane Quadrotor
Tail-Sitter UAV .Drones 2023, 7, 292. [CrossRef]
39. Namuduri, K.; Fiebig, U.-C.; Matolak, D.W.; Guvenc, I.; Hari, K.; Maattaanen, H.-L. Advanced Air Mobility: Research Directions
for Communications, Navigation, and Surveillance. IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag. 2022, 17, 65–73. [CrossRef]
40. Elmokadem, T.; Savkin, A.V . Towards Fully Autonomous UAVs: A Survey. Sensors 2021, 21, 6223. [CrossRef]
41. Jin, Z.; Li, D.; Xiang, J. Robot Pilot: A New Autonomous System Toward Flying Manned Aerial Vehicles.Engineering 2023, 27,
242–253. [CrossRef]
42. Wei, H.; Lou, B.; Zhang, Z.; Liang, B.; Wang, F.; Lv, C. Autonomous Navigation for eVTOL: Review and Future Perspectives.IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh. 2024, 9, 4145–4171. [CrossRef]
43. SESAR Joint Undertaking. SESAR Automation in Air Traffic Management—Long-Term Vision and Initial Research Roadmap.
Available online: https://www.sesarju.eu/automation (accessed on 15 November 2024).
44. Arafat, M.Y.; Moh, S. JRCS: Joint Routing and Charging Strategy for Logistics Drones. IEEE Internet Things J. 2022, 9, 21751–21764.
[CrossRef]
45. Pukhova, A.; Llorca, C.; Moreno, A.T.; Staves, C.; Zhang, Q.; Moeckel, R. Flying Taxis Revived: Can Urban Air Mobility Reduce
Road Congestion? J. Urban Mobil. 2021, 1, 100002. [CrossRef]
46. Bharadwaj, S.; Carr, S.; Neogi, N.A.; Topcu, U. Decentralized Control Synthesis for Air Traffic Management in Urban Air Mobility.
IEEE Trans. Control Netw. Syst. 2021, 8, 598–608. [CrossRef]
47. Ince, B.; Celdran Martinez, V .; Selvam, P .K.; Petrunin, I.; Seo, M.; Tsourdos, A. Sense and Avoid Considerations for Safe sUAS
Operations in Urban Environments. IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag. 2024, 1–16. [CrossRef]
48. Song, K. Optimal Vertiport Airspace and Approach Control Strategy for Urban Air Mobility (UAM).Sustainability 2023, 15, 437.
[CrossRef]
49. Bulusu, V .; Onat, E.B.; Sengupta, R.; Yedavalli, P .; Macfarlane, J. A Traffic Demand Analysis Method for Urban Air Mobility.IEEE
Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021, 22, 6039–6047. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 26 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 26 of 28
50. Kim, J.; Atkins, E. Airspace Geofencing and Flight Planning for Low-Altitude, Urban, Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems. Appl.
Sci. 2022, 12, 576. [CrossRef]
51. Guan, X.; Lyu, R.; Shi, H.; Chen, J. A Survey of Safety Separation Management and Collision Avoidance Approaches of Civil UAS
Operating in Integration National Airspace System. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 2020, 33, 2851–2863. [CrossRef]
52. Afari, S.; Golubev, V .; Lyrintzis, A.S.; Mankbadi, R. Review of Control Technologies for Quiet Operations of Advanced Air-Mobility.
Appl. Sci. 2023, 13, 2543. [CrossRef]
53. Niklaß, M.; Dzikus, N.; Swaid, M.; Berling, J.; Lührs, B.; Lau, A.; Terekhov, I.; Gollnick, V . A Collaborative Approach for an
Integrated Modeling of Urban Air Transportation Systems. Aerospace 2020, 7, 50. [CrossRef]
54. Ahmed, S.S.; Hulme, K.F.; Fountas, G.; Eker, U.; Benedyk, I.; Still, S.E.; Anastasopoulos, P .C. The Flying Car—Challenges and
Strategies Toward Future Adoption. Front. Built Environ. 2020, 6, 106. [CrossRef]
55. Li, K.; Wu, Y.; Bakar, A.; Wang, S.; Li, Y.; Wen, D. Energy System Optimization and Simulation for Low-Altitude Solar-Powered
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. Aerospace 2022, 9, 331. [CrossRef]
56. Qu, W.; Huang, J.; Li, C.; Liao, X. A Demand Forecasting Model for Urban Air Mobility in Chengdu, China. Green Energy Intell.
Transp. 2024, 3, 100173. [CrossRef]
57. Liu, Y.; Kreimeier, M.; Stumpf, E.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, H. Overview of Recent Endeavors on Personal Aerial Vehicles: A Focus on the
US and Europe Led Research Activities. Prog. Aerosp. Sci. 2017, 91, 53–66. [CrossRef]
58. Abu Zaid, A.; Belmekki, B.E.Y.; Alouini, M. eVTOL Communications and Networking in UAM: Requirements, Key Enablers, and
Challenges. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2023, 61, 154–160. [CrossRef]
59. Chae, M.; Kim, S.H.; Kim, M.; Park, H.-T.; Kim, S.H. Potential market based policy considerations for Urban Air Mobility. J. Air
Transp. Manag. 2024, 119, 102654. [CrossRef]
60. Chandrasekharan, S.; Gomez, K.; Al-Hourani, A.; Kandeepan, S.; Rasheed, T.; Goratti, L.; Reynaud, L.; Grace, D.; Bucaille, I.;
Wirth, T.; et al. Designing and Implementing Future Aerial Communication Networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2016, 54, 26–34.
[CrossRef]
61. Piccioni, A.; Marotta, A.; Rinaldi, C.; Graziosi, F. Enhancing Mobile Networks for Urban Air Mobility Connectivity.IEEE Netw.
Lett. 2024, 6, 110–114. [CrossRef]
62. Zhou, Q.; Tan, F. Avionics of Electric Vertical Take-off and Landing in the Urban Air Mobility: A Review.IEEE Aerosp. Electron.
Syst. Mag. 2024, 39, 1–26. [CrossRef]
63. Kamilova, Z.A. A Route Network Planning Method for Urban Air Delivery. Transp. Res. Part E-Logist. Transp. Rev. 2022, 166,
102872. [CrossRef]
64. Shon, H.-K.; Kim, S.; Lee, J. Optimal Planning of Urban Air Mobility Systems Accounting for Ground Access Trips. Int. J. Sustain.
Transp. 2024, 18, 356–378. [CrossRef]
65. Arafat, M.Y.; Moh, S. A Survey on Cluster-Based Routing Protocols for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Networks.IEEE Access 2019, 7,
498–516. [CrossRef]
66. Mao, Y.; Dizdar, O.; Clerckx, B.; Schober, R.; Popovski, P .; Poor, H.V . Rate-Splitting Multiple Access: Fundamentals, Survey, and
Future Research Trends. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2022, 24, 2073–2126. [CrossRef]
67. Li, J.; Shen, D.; Yu, F.; Qi, D. A Method for Air Route Network Planning of Urban Air Mobility.Aerospace 2024, 11, 584. [CrossRef]
68. Tsai, K.-C.; Fan, L.; Lent, R.; Wang, L.-C.; Han, Z. Distributionally Robust Optimal Routing for Integrated Satellite-Terrestrial
Networks Under Uncertainty. IEEE Trans. Commun. 2024, 72, 6401–6415. [CrossRef]
69. Causa, F.; Fasano, G. Multi-Objective Modular Strategic Planning Framework for Low Altitude Missions Within the Urban Air
Mobility Ecosystem. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 2024, 60, 474–489. [CrossRef]
70. Baltaci, A.; Dinc, E.; Ozger, M.; Alabbasi, A.; Cavdar, C.; Schupke, D. A Survey of Wireless Networks for Future Aerial
Communications (FACOM). IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2021, 23, 2833–2884. [CrossRef]
71. Alam, M.M.; Moh, S. Joint Topology Control and Routing in a UAV Swarm for Crowd Surveillance.J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2022,
204, 103427. [CrossRef]
72. Arafat, M.Y.; Moh, S. Bio-Inspired Approaches for Energy-Efficient Localization and Clustering in UAV Networks for Monitoring
Wildfires in Remote Areas. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 18649–18669. [CrossRef]
73. Kim, S.H. Receding Horizon Scheduling of On-Demand Urban Air Mobility With Heterogeneous Fleet. IEEE Trans. Aerosp.
Electron. Syst. 2020, 56, 2751–2761. [CrossRef]
74. Ansari, S.; Taha, A.; Dashtipour, K.; Sambo, Y.A.; Abbasi, Q.H.; Imran, M. Urban Air Mobility—A 6G Use Case? Front. Commun.
Netw. 2021, 2, 729767. [CrossRef]
75. Khan, A.A.; Khan, M.M.; Khan, K.M.; Arshad, J.; Ahmad, F. A Blockchain-Based Decentralized Machine Learning Framework for
Collaborative Intrusion Detection within UAVs. Comput. Netw. 2021, 196, 108217. [CrossRef]
76. Alam, M.M.; Moh, S. Survey on Q-Learning-Based Position-Aware Routing Protocols in Flying Ad Hoc Networks. Electronics
2022, 11, 1099. [CrossRef]
77. Niu, Z.; Nie, P .; Tao, L.; Sun, J.; Zhu, B. RTK with the Assistance of an IMU-Based Pedestrian Navigation Algorithm for
Smartphones. Sensors 2019, 19, 3228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Saeed, N.; Al-Naffouri, T.Y.; Alouini, M.-S. Wireless communication for Flying Cars. Front. Commun. Netw. 2021, 2, 689881.
[CrossRef]

===== PAGE 27 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 27 of 28
79. Adanza, D.; Gifre, L.; Alemany, P .; Fern ández-Palacios, J.P .; González-de-Dios, O.; Muñoz, R.; Vilalta, R. Enabling Traffic
Forecasting with Cloud-Native SDN Controller in Transport Networks. Comput. Netw. 2024, 250, 110565. [CrossRef]
80. Hosseini, N.; Jamal, H.; Haque, J.; Magesacher, T.; Matolak, D.W. UAV command and control, navigation and surveillance: A
review of potential 5G and satellite systems. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, MT, USA, 2–9 March
2019. [CrossRef]
81. Beidas, B.F.; Seshadri, R.I. OFDM-Like Signaling for Broadband Satellite Applications: Analysis and Advanced Compensation.
IEEE Trans. Commun. 2017, 65, 4433–4445. [CrossRef]
82. del Peral-Rosado, J.A.; Saloranta, J.; Destino, G.; Destino, G.; Lopez-Salcedo, J.A.; Seco-Granados, G. Methodology for Simulating
5G and GNSS High-Accuracy Positioning. Sensors 2018, 18, 3220. [CrossRef]
83. Cui, X.; Gulliver, T.A.; Li, J.; Zhang, H. Vehicle Positioning Using 5G Millimeter-Wave Systems.IEEE Access 2016, 4, 6964–6973.
[CrossRef]
84. Arafat, M.Y.; Alam, M.M.; Moh, S. Vision-Based Navigation Techniques for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Review and Challenges.
Drones 2023, 7, 89. [CrossRef]
85. Su, Y.; Xu, Y. A Risk Assessment Method for Mid-Air Collisions in Urban Air Mobility Operations.IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. 2024,
1–15. [CrossRef]
86. Aldao, E.; González-de Santos, L.M.; González-Jorge, H. LiDAR Based Detect and Avoid System for UAV Navigation in UAM
Corridors. Drones 2022, 6, 185. [CrossRef]
87. Eurocontrol. ACAS (Airborne Collision Avoidance System). Available online: https://www.eurocontrol.int/system/acas
(accessed on 15 November 2024).
88. Son, Y.-S.; Sung, H.-K.; Heo, S.W. Automotive Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave Radar Interference Reduction Using
Per-Vehicle Chirp Sequences. Sensors 2018, 18, 2831. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Sahin, A.; Hosseini, N.; Jamal, H.; Hoque, S.S.M.; Matolak, D.W. DFT-Spread-OFDM-Based Chirp Transmission.IEEE Commun.
Lett. 2021, 25, 902–906. [CrossRef]
90. Bertram, J.; Wei, P .; Zambreno, J. A Fast Markov Decision Process-Based Algorithm for Collision Avoidance in Urban Air Mobility.
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2022, 23, 15420–15433. [CrossRef]
91. Yang, X.; Wei, P . Autonomous Free Flight Operations in Urban Air Mobility With Computational Guidance and Collision
Avoidance. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021, 22, 5962–5975. [CrossRef]
92. Park, C.; Kim, G.S.; Park, S.; Jung, S.; Kim, J. Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for Cooperative Air Transportation Services in
City-Wide Autonomous Urban Air Mobility. IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. 2023, 8, 4016–4030. [CrossRef]
93. Pongsakornsathien, N.; Bijjahalli, S.; Gardi, A.; Symons, A.; Xi, Y.; Sabatini, R.; Kistan, T. A Performance-Based Airspace Model
for Unmanned Aircraft Systems Traffic Management. Aerospace 2020, 7, 154. [CrossRef]
94. Manyam, S.G.; Casbeer, D.W.; Darbha, S.; Weintraub, I.E.; Kalyanam, K. Path Planning and Energy Management of Hybrid Air
Vehicles for Urban Air Mobility.IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2022, 7, 10176–10183. [CrossRef]
95. Huang, G.; Hu, M.; Yang, X.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Huang, F. A Review of Constrained Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm-
Based Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Mission Planning: Key Techniques and Challenges. Drones 2024, 8, 316. [CrossRef]
96. Neto, E.C.P .; Baum, D.M.; de Almeida, J.R.; Camargo, J.B.; Cugnasca, P .S. A Trajectory Evaluation Platform for Urban Air Mobility
(UAM). IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021, 23, 9136–9145. [CrossRef]
97. Jin, Z.; Ng, K.K.H.; Zhang, C. Robust optimisation for vertiport location problem considering travel mode choice behaviour in
Urban Air Mobility Systems. J. Air Transp. Res. Soc. 2024, 2, 100006. [CrossRef]
98. Rigas, E.S.; Kolios, P .; Ellinas, G. Scheduling aerial vehicles in large scale urban air mobility schemes with vehicle relocation.IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh. 2024, 1–15. [CrossRef]
99. Yunus, F.; Casalino, D.; Avallone, F.; Ragni, D. Efficient prediction of urban air mobility noise in a vertiport environment.Aerosp.
Sci. Technol. 2023, 139, 108410. [CrossRef]
100. Reiche, C.; Cohen, A.; Fernando, C. An Initial Assessment of the Potential Weather Barriers of Urban Air Mobility.IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021, 22, 6018–6027. [CrossRef]
101. Yahi, N.; Gudeta, S.G.; Karimoddini, A. On-the-fly coordination of maneuvers for separation assurance of UAM aircraft in
congested airspace. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2024, 25, 18714–18733. [CrossRef]
102. Hamissi, A.; Dhraief, A. A survey on the Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management. ACM Comput. Surv. 2023, 56, 1–37.
[CrossRef]
103. Abdellaoui, R.; Naser, F.; Stasicka, I.; Hagag, N.; Lee, H.; Moolchandani, K.A. Building a Performance Comparison Framework
for Urban Air Mobility Airspace Management Concepts. In Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE/AIAA 42nd Digital Avionics Systems
Conference (DASC), Barcelona, Spain, 1–5 October 2023; pp. 1–10. [CrossRef]
104. Han, R.; Li, H.; Apaza, R.; Knoblock, E.; Gasper, M. Deep Reinforcement Learning Assisted Spectrum Management in cellular
based Urban Air Mobility. IEEE Wirel. Commun. 2022, 29, 14–21. [CrossRef]
105. Tomaszewski, L.; Kołakowski, R. Advanced Air Mobility and Evolution of Mobile Networks. Drones 2023, 7, 556. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 28 / 28 =====
Drones 2024, 8, 702 28 of 28
106. Phadke, A.; Medrano, F.A.; Chu, T.; Sekharan, C.N.; Starek, M.J. Modeling Wind and Obstacle Disturbances for Effective
Performance Observations and Analysis of Resilience in UAV Swarms. Aerospace 2024, 11, 237. [CrossRef]
107. Peng, H.; Bhanpato, J.; Behere, A.; Mavris, D.N. A Rapid Surrogate Model for Estimating Aviation Noise Impact across Various
Departure Profiles and Operating Conditions. Aerospace 2023, 10, 627. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.