SOURCE: references/MainPaper/1-s2.0-S2352864823000512-main.pdf
PAGES: 14



===== PAGE 1 / 14 =====
Fast UAV path planning in urban environments based on three-step
experience buffer sampling DDPG
Shasha Tian a,b, Yuanxiang Li c, Xiao Zhang a,b, *, Lu Zheng a,b, Linhui Cheng a, Wei She d,
Wei Xie a, b
a College of Computer Science, South-Central Minzu University, Wuhan, 430074, China
b Hubei Provincial Engineering Research Center for Intelligent Management of Manufacturing Enterprises, Wuhan, 430074, China
c School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China
d School of Mathematics & Statistics, South-Central Minzu University, Wuhan, 430074, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Unmanned aerial vehicle
Path planning
Deep deterministic policy gradient
Three-step experience buffer
Particle swarm optimization
ABSTRACT
The path planning of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) is a critical issue in emergency communication and rescue
operations, especially in adversarial urban environments. Due to the continuity of the ﬂying space, complex
building obstacles, and the aircraft's high dynamics, traditional algorithms cannot ﬁnd the optimal collision-free
ﬂying path between the UAV station and the destination. Accordingly, in this paper, we study the fast UAV path
planning problem in a 3D urban environment from a source point to a target point and propose a Three-Step
Experience Buffer Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TSEB-DDPG) algorithm. We ﬁrst build the 3D model of
a complex urban environment with buildings and project the 3D building surface into many 2D geometric shapes.
After transformation, we propose the Hierarchical Learning Particle Swarm Optimization (HL-PSO) to obtain the
empirical path. Then, to ensure the accuracy of the obtained paths, the empirical path, the collision information
and fast transition information are stored in the three experience buffers of the TSEB-DDPG algorithm as dynamic
guidance information. The sampling ratio of each buffer is dynamically adapted to the training stages. Moreover,
we designed a reward mechanism to improve the convergence speed of the DDPG algorithm for UAV path
planning. The proposed TSEB-DDPG algorithm has also been compared to three widely used competitors
experimentally, and the results show that the TSEB-DDPG algorithm can archive the fastest convergence speed
and the highest accuracy. We also conduct experiments in real scenarios and compare the real path planning
obtained by the HL-PSO algorithm, DDPG algorithm, and TSEB-DDPG algorithm. The results show that the TSEB-
DDPG algorithm can archive almost the best in terms of accuracy, the average time of actual path planning, and
the success rate.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed many military and commercial appli-
cations with Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), such as emergency
communication and rescue operation in urban areas.
UAV path planning is a critical problem of the rescue operation,
especially in adversarial urban environments, which is generally
formulated as a UAV planning a collision-free optimal or suboptimal safe
path in the space with obstacles [ 1]. However, to conduct an emergency
communication task or rescue operation in a 3D urban environment, a
UAV usually encounters various obstacles, such as buildings and elec-
trical wires, which may affect the UAV's safety.
Moreover, the convergence speed of the UAV path planning algorithm
is highly required for emergency tasks in adversarial urban environ-
ments. Due to the continuity of the ﬂying space, complex building ob-
stacles, the high dynamics of the aircraft, and rapid response
requirements, it is very challenging to design a fast path planning scheme
that can ﬁnd the optimal collision-free ﬂying path between the UAV
station and destination.
Researchers commonly use several methods to solve UAV path
planning problems, including traditional path planning methods, swarm
intelligence algorithms, and deep reinforcement learning algorithms.
In traditional path planning methods, the arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld
method [ 2], cell decomposition method [ 3,4], and dynamic window
* Corresponding author. College of Computer Science, South-Central Minzu University, Wuhan, 430074, China.
E-mail addresses: shashatian77@mail.scuec.edu.cn (S. Tian), yxli@whu.edu.cn (Y. Li), xiao.zhang@my.cityu.edu.hk (X. Zhang), lu2008@mail.scuec.edu.cn
(L. Zheng), 44393390@qq.com (L. Cheng), wshe@mail.scuec.edu.cn (W. She), xiewei962@qq.com (W. Xie).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Digital Communications and Networks
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/dcan
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2023.02.016
Received 31 July 2022; Received in revised form 6 January 2023; Accepted 26 February 2023
Available online 9 March 2023
2352-8648/© 2023 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826

===== PAGE 2 / 14 =====
method [ 5] are the most representatives. The arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld
method has the advantages of simple structure and easy implementation.
However, this method is mainly used to avoid dynamic obstacles in local
search. The UAV could fall into the local optimum due to the unreason-
able potential ﬁeld equation when faced with a relatively complex dy-
namic environment. The cell decomposition method is mainly used for
the UAV path planning of fully covering a simple and static environment.
The dynamic window method transforms position control into speed
control and is used mainly in local path planning.
The swarm intelligence algorithm is inspired by natural phenomena
and living laws [ 6,7]. It can transform the optimal path search problem
into a function optimization problem. The swarm intelligence algorithm
can self-learn and self-update, which is useful for solving multi-peak
optimization problems. Therefore, it is well suited to deal with path
planning problems in complex environments. Particle Swarm Optimiza-
tion (PSO) is a classical and widely used swarm intelligence algorithm.
Compared to the other swarm intelligence algorithms, the PSO algorithm
is easy to implement and has strong scalability, which has been shown to
efﬁciently solve various benchmark optimization problems with low
running time [ 8].
Some researchers have used the PSO algorithm and its variants to
solve the UAV path planning problem and have achieved favourable
results. Sun designed a velocity observer to estimate the unmeasurable
speed, investigated a path planning method using improved PSO com-
bined with Dijkstra's algorithm, and obtained a fast desired optimal
motion path for obstacle avoidance [9]. Shao proposed an improved PSO,
which uses a chaos-based logistic map to improve the initial particle
distribution and designs adaptive linear-varying constant acceleration
coefﬁcients and maximum velocity [ 10]. The PSO algorithm works well
for static global path planning, but the ﬁtness function of the PSO algo-
rithm should be problem-speci ﬁc. Its adaptability is limited in practice.
Moreover, in a dynamic environment, the UAV needs to change its
moving path according to the fast situation, which is beyond the capa-
bilities of the PSO algorithm. The PSO algorithm cannot respond quickly
to path planning requests in complex and variable urban relief
environments.
DDPG is a deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithm for solving
continuous control problems. Since it is consistent with the continuous
control idea of UAV path planning, it has been applied to UAV path
planning. If the model of the UAV path planning algorithm based on the
RL algorithm is trained accurately, the response speed of its path plan-
ning can be greatly improved compared to the swarm intelligence algo-
rithm. Now many scholars have studied this area. Dong proposes a path
planning method based on an improved DDPG reinforcement learning
algorithm, which uses a small amount of prior knowledge to accelerate
the training of deep reinforcement learning, reduce the number of trials
and errors, and adopt an adaptive exploration method based on the
ε-greedy algorithm [11]. Tu presents a reinforcement learning algorithm
to implement UAV path planning and obstacle avoidance [ 12]. However,
the DDPG algorithm is an unsupervised self-learning method. In complex
environments and with limited training time, the accuracy of the DDPG
algorithm is not guaranteed due to the random learning direction of the
agent.
PSO algorithm is a heuristic optimization method which imitates
nature. It is simple to operate and has a high search ef ﬁciency. However,
it is apt to be precocious in its early stages and slow in its later stages.
Moreover, for each speci ﬁc problem, speci ﬁc modelling training is
required, which is not convenient for transfer learning. Deep reinforce-
ment learning algorithm is a class of autonomous learning algorithms
developed recently. Since it is based on a trial-and-error learning algo-
rithm, its convergence rate is slow. However, deep reinforcement
learning algorithm also has the clear advantage of directly applying to
similar problems once training is completed, and facilitating transfer
learning. Therefore, in this paper, we combine the two algorithms and
use the PSO algorithm optimized according to the problem to provide the
initial model parameters for the DDPG algorithm to solve the UAV path
planning problem quickly.
This paper presents a three-step experience buffer DDPG algorithm
(TSEB-DDPG) for ef ﬁciently solving the continuous fast UAV path plan-
ning problem. In the TSEB-DDPG algorithm, the global optimal path in-
formation is obtained by hierarchical learning particle swarm
optimization (HL-PSO). The collision information and fast transition in-
formation are stored in three experience buffers, respectively. The sam-
pling ratio of each buffer is dynamically adapted to the training stages.
The path optimization results of HL-PSO are used to provide initial
parameter training for the DDPG algorithm model, which can effectively
prevent the DDPG algorithm from exploding in dimension. In the later
stage, the trial-and-error learning of DDPG algorithm can effectively
avoid the precocious convergence of the HL-PSO algorithm.
Our key novelties and main contributions in this paper are summa-
rized as follows.
● A 3D model of a complex urban environment with buildings is con-
structed. To simplify the problem we study, a geometric approach is
proposed to project the 3D building surface onto a myriad of 2D
geometries.
● To ef ﬁciently solve the UAV path planning problem, the HL-PSO al-
gorithm is proposed. The modi ﬁed PSO algorithm selects different
learning samples for different classes of particles based on population
diversity to ensure the ef ﬁcient evolution of each type. By incorpo-
rating the optimization output of the PSO algorithm into the DDPG
algorithm, the accuracy of the DDPG algorithm under ﬁnite training
time is guaranteed.
● Due to the low ef ﬁciency of the experience buffer in the DDPG al-
gorithm, three experience buffers are used in combination with the
optimization results of the PSO algorithm. We propose a step-wise
sampling strategy that allows each experience to play its role in
time. The dynamic experience buffer sampling strategy ensures that
the experience information exits from the guidance of the DDPG al-
gorithm promptly and improves the self-learning ability.
In this paper, we combine the advantages of HL-PSO and DDPG al-
gorithms with a speciﬁc reward policy and propose a solution policy for a
particular UAV path planning problem.
2. Related work
PSO is a very classical swarm intelligence algorithm. Although it can
not meet the rapid response of path planning in various urgent and dy-
namic environments, as an excellent heuristic algorithm veri ﬁed by
numerous scientists, it can still play an important role in the rapid
response requirements of path planning. Research into the PSO algorithm
has a long history in path planning. The path planning problem can be
abstracted as a single objective optimization problem. Researchers have
done a lot of work to improve the convergence speed and accuracy of the
PSO algorithm [ 13]. Several attempts have been made to improve the
basic PSO algorithm, such as parameter adjustment [ 14–17],
multi-population method [
18–20], hybrid algorithm [ 21–23], and
learning model [ 24,25]. In terms of parameter adjustment, researchers
mainly studied inertia weight, social cognitive factors, and individual
cognitive factors. These parameters are adjusted as linear or nonlinear
functions to effectively balance global and local search ability [ 14–16].
Nobile proposes the Fuzzy Self-Tuning PSO which exploits Fuzzy Logic to
calculate the inertia, cognitive and social factor, and minimum and
maximum velocity independently for each particle [ 17]. In the aspect of
multi-population, researchers use the interaction and cooperation of
multiple populations to search for optimization jointly. Ye proposed a
multi-agent hybrid particle swarm optimization to solve the problem of
wastewater treatment network planning [18]. Lan selected good particles
to form new particle swarms, which were interactively updated with the
original particle swarms to create a hierarchical sorting group optimizer
for large-scale optimization [ 19]. Al-Bahrani proposed to overcome the
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
814

===== PAGE 3 / 14 =====
zigzagging of the direction of search, the orthogonal PSO which particles
are updated using only one guide [ 20]. Xia proposed a dynamic
multi-swarm particle swarm optimization algorithm based on an elite
learning strategy, which fully uses the advantages of different subgroups
and lets them play different roles in different stages of evolution [ 21].
Researchers also favour a hybrid algorithm. Combining the advantages of
the PSO algorithm and other classical algorithms (such as the genetic
algorithm and ant colony algorithm), many hybrid algorithms based on
the PSO algorithm have been proposed [ 22,23]. Some researchers also
devoted themselves to improving the learning model of the PSO algo-
rithm and seeking better learning samples and learning strategies for
particles. Xia reconstructed the learning model of particle swarm opti-
mization by drawing on human memory and forgetting ability, thus
increasing the population's diversity and improving algorithm optimi-
zation accuracy [ 24]. Chen proposed a new biogeographic learning
strategy for particle swarm optimization [ 25]. Most research is to
improve the PSO algorithm for general optimization problems. In this
paper, the PSO algorithm is enhanced according to the characteristics of
UAV path planning to improve the algorithm's accuracy and convergence
speed. The empirical path obtained by the improved PSO algorithm is
used as the experience of the RL algorithm to improve the accuracy and
convergence speed of the UAV path planning algorithm.
Deep reinforcement learning algorithms are often used in decision-
making problems [ 26]. In this paper, UAV global path planning is a
continuous control problem, so the DDPG algorithm is selected for
research. Lillicrap proposed the DDPG algorithm in 2015 to solve the
problem of fast continuous control [ 27]. A key link of the DDPG algo-
rithm is the playback mechanism of the experience buffer. Therefore,
many researchers have focused on this research hot spot. Lin proposed
the experience playback mechanism in 1992 and used an experience
buffer to store past experiences [ 28]. Hou used the preferred sampling
DDPG algorithm to replace the uni ﬁed sampling to test the inverted
pendulum task. The preferred sampling mechanism reduced the training
time and improved the training stability [ 29]. Li proposed replay
double-delay DDPG of multiple experiences to balance random power
perturbations in integrated energy systems [ 30]. Zhang used an asyn-
chronous mode to design an experience buffer data acquisition scheme
and proposed an asynchronous intermittent DDPG algorithm to solve the
problem of continuous control in a complex computing environment
[31]. Bruin rewrote the two experience replay databases using different
strategies to ensure uniform experience distribution [ 32]. Rojanaarpa
improved learning stability and training speed by storing only rare and
highly irrelevant data in the experience buffer [ 33]. Xiang combined the
data pruning in [ 34] with the priority sampling in [ 35] and proposed a
comprehensive priority data pruning method. To speed up the training
process, the experience buffer is ﬁrst sampled, and then similar samples
are deleted [ 36]. Peng replaced the neural network optimizer in DDPG
with the RAdam algorithm and combined the curiosity algorithm to
improve the success rate and convergence rate. In addition, the authors
added preferential experience replay and introduced transfer learning to
improve training performance [ 37]. The existing improvements to the
experience buffer mainly focus on increasing the utilization of important
samples, but some important samples may be missed. In this paper,
different experience buffers are used to store different important sam-
ples, and dynamic sampling is carried out in stages to improve the al-
gorithm's accuracy.
3. System model
We consider a UAV path planning problem for rescue operation or
delivering emergency communication, where the urban environment is
modeled in 3D geometrical space with buildings of different heights, as
shown in Fig. 1
. Denote the 3D space as U, the number of task points is M,
and the jth task point is represented as Tj, j 2f 1; 2; ⋯; Mg.
We denote the starting point as Sðx0; y0; z0Þ, the destination point as
EðxMþ1;yMþ1;zMþ1Þ, and the UAV station as Ql, l 2 f1; 2;⋯;Lg, where L is
the number of stations. The obstacles, such as buildings, are denoted as
B1, B2, …, BF , in which Bi is modeled with a function f ðBiÞ and F is the
number of the buildings. f ðBiÞ represents the shape information of the
building Bi. A UAV needs to ﬂy from a starting point to several task points
at different altitudes. The UAV is assumed to be equipped with a suf ﬁ-
cient battery of energy for the task. Our objective is to design a fast al-
gorithm to ﬁnd short collision-free ﬂight paths for UAVs to deliver
emergency services.
3.1. Transformation of 3D space geometrical model
In complex urban environments, there are many static obstacles, such
as buildings, street lights, and signboards, and many dynamic obstacles,
such as crowds and vehicles. Therefore, to ensure the execution ef ﬁ-
ciency of the algorithm studied in this paper and minimize energy con-
sumption, the 3D urban space is modeled as a multi-layer 2D plane
during the UAV mission. We construct a stochastic 3D spatial geometry
model of an urban environment and project the 3D path planning task
onto several 2D planes at different heights.
We divide 3D urban space into a number N of 2D planes Pi, i 2f 1; 2;
⋯;Ng. To clearly illustrate the dimensional transformation, we illustrate
with an example as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2 (a) shows the randomly generated 3D space of the urban en-
vironments with 40 buildings divided into three 2D planes. In the space
of the ﬁrst, second and third layers, the 2D plane motion map of the UAV
is shown in Fig. 2 (b), (c) and(d). We can see that each layer has a
Fig. 1. 3D geometrical space with buildings of different heights.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
815

===== PAGE 4 / 14 =====
different obstacle to avoid. In other words, when the UAV ﬂies in the 3D
space in Fig. 2 (a), instead of carrying out 3D path planning, we only need
to plan the path in the 2D planes in Fig. 2(b), (c) and (d) according to the
height information of speciﬁc tasks. In this way, the efﬁciency of the path
planning algorithm can be greatly improved.
3.2. UAV energy consumption model
The ultimate goal of UAV path planning is to accomplish emergency
tasks in the least amount of time. This requires us to study the energy
consumption of UAV. According to Ref. [ 38], we model a UAV's power
pðm; v;
αÞ as a function of its weight m, velocity v and ﬂying direction
degree α.
We randomly generated the urban environment model of 10 build-
ings to explain and display the energy consumption more clearly. As
shown in Fig. 3, when a UAV ﬂies vertically from point ðxi,y i; ziÞ to point
ðxj,y j;zjÞ, we just need to calculate the energy consumption of its vertical
ﬂight. When it ﬂies horizontally from point ðxj,y j; zjÞ to point ðxk,y k;zkÞ,
we just need to calculate the energy consumption of its horizontal ﬂight.
When the UAV is ﬂying horizontally, we denote v ¼ v== and θðv==; αÞ
¼ θðv==; 0Þ. η is a constant. So the horizontal energy consumption from
point ðxj; yj; zjÞ to point ðxk; yk; zkÞ is
pj→k
/C0
m; v==; 0
/C1
¼
mg
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ/C0
xj /C0 xk
/C1 2
þ
/C0
yj /C0 yk
/C1 2
q
θðv==; 0Þη (1)
When the UAV is ﬂying vertically, we denote v ¼ v? and θðv?;αÞ¼ θðv?;
π =2Þ. So the vertical energy consumption from point ðxi; yi; ziÞ to point
ðxj; yj; zjÞ is
pi→j ðm; v?; π = 2Þ¼ mg
/C0
zj /C0 zi
/C1
θðv?; π=2Þη (2)
Without loss of generality, when a UAV is conducting an emergency
communication task or rescue operation, it will not carry out frequent
altitude changes. Therefore, in the problem studied in this paper, the
energy consumption required by UAV vertical ﬂight is much smaller than
horizontal ﬂight, p? ≪ p==. In other words, the energy consumption of
UAV in hierarchical path planning is dominated by the energy con-
sumption in horizontal ﬂight. In horizontal ﬂight, the energy consump-
tion of UAV is determined by the distance. Therefore, we can directly
optimize the ﬂying distance of the UAV to save energy and deliver fast
service. Fig. 4 shows a 2D working environment for UAV after the 3D
space transformation in section 3.1.
4. HL-PSO algorithm
4.1. Problem analysis
To distinguish the safe path and collision path in UAV global path
planning and explain their relationship or among other excellent paths in
each iteration process, we described them as follows in Fig. 5 . It shows
that the Euclidian distance between the locally optimal safety path 1 and
the collision path 2 is close. Still, path 2 passes through the obstacle three
Fig. 2. The transformation of a 3D urban space into N 2D planes.
Fig. 3. Energy consumption analysis of the UAV in horizontal and verti-
cal ﬂight.
 Fig. 4. The 2D working environment of UAV.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
816

===== PAGE 5 / 14 =====
times. Path 3 is farther away from path 1 but better than path 2.
Therefore, for the global path planning problem, the local optimal solu-
tions are distributed in different regions, and the Euclidian distance be-
tween them is often far away. This paper is inspired by the above
problems to improve the PSO algorithm. Therefore, for this problem, we
make all kinds of particles learn from the excellent particles far away
from them in different ways. In addition, we measure the diversity of
algorithms to get beyond local optimality.
4.2. Basic PSO algorithm
This paper aims to study the problem of fast path planning for UAVs in
urban environments. Therefore, we abstract the path of the UAV from the
starting point to the ending point as a particle and obtain the optimal or
sub-optimal path by iterative optimization of the PSO algorithm.
In the basic PSO algorithm, the problem's solution is abstracted into
mass-less and volume-less particles and extended to the D-dimensional
space, forming the particle swarm X ¼ð x1;x2;⋯;xi;⋯;xN Þ. Where N is the
population size, i 2 f1; 2; ⋯; Ng. Each particle is described by a position
xi ¼ð x1
i ; x2
i ; ⋯; xd
i ; ⋯; xD
i Þ and a velocity vi ¼ð v1
i ; v2
i ; ⋯; vd
i ⋯; vD
i Þ, and the
particle is updated over the iterations. The particle swarm gets closer to
the optimal solution as the iteration continues. The update of a particle
can be described as
viðt þ 1Þ¼ ω viðtÞþ c1r1
/C0
xpbest:i /C0 xiðtÞ
/C1
þ c2 r2
/C0
xgbest /C0 xiðtÞ
/C1
(3)
xiðt þ 1Þ¼ xiðtÞþ viðt þ 1Þ (4)
Where t is the number of iterations, and T represents the total number,
t 2 f1; 2; ⋯; Tg. xiðt þ1Þ and viðt þ1Þ represent the position and velocity
of the particle in the ( tþ1)th iteration respectively. xpbest:i and xgbest
represent the personal historical best position of the ith particle and the
global best position respectively. ω represents the inertia weight. c1 and
c2 are the individual cognitive factor and the social cognitive factor. r1
and r2 are random numbers uniformly between 0 and 1. Algorithm 1
described the basic PSO in detail.
4.3. Diversity measurement
The diversity of the population is often used to evaluate the degree of
convergence of the algorithm. In this section, we will design a mea-
surement method of the diversity of the population to guide the HL-PSO
algorithm in choosing different learning strategies.
dg xi ðtÞ is assumed to be the Euclide distance between the global
optimal particle and the ith particle after the tth iteration, which can be
expressed as
dg xi ðtÞ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
XD
d¼1
ðxd
i ðtÞ/C0 gd ðtÞÞ
2
vuu
t (5)
It is assumed that the global optimal particle is x
N . dav g x ðtÞ is the
average Euclidean distance between the global optimal particle and all
the particles in the population (except for itself) after the tth iteration,
which can be expressed as
dav g xðtÞ¼ 1
N /C0 1
XN/C0 1
i¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
XD
d¼1
ðxd
i ðtÞ/C0 gd ðtÞÞ
2
vuu
t (6)
Assume that W is a positive integer. When t > W, we add the
d
av g x ðtÞ of the ðt /C0 W þ 1Þth to the tth iteration to take the average value
and get formula (7).
dav g x WavgðtÞ¼ 1
W
Xt
i¼t/C0 Wþ1
dav g xðiÞ (7)
In this paper, through the experimental veri ﬁcation, when W ¼ 10,
the algorithm achieved better performance.
By dividing dav g x ðtÞ by dav g x Wavg ðtÞ, the diversity trend of the t
iteration compared with the previous W iteration can be obtained. The
experiment shows that the variation of diversity after the tth iteration is
very large compared with the average level of diversity in the previous W
iteration. To show the variation more clearly, we carry out logarithmic
processing on it and get
f ðtÞ ¼ log
/C18 dav g xðtÞ
dav g x WavgðtÞ
/C19
(8)
We conducted some experiments to compare the relationship be-
tween changes in diversity levels and ﬁtness values in Equations (3)–(8).
Some standard test functions are used in the experiment. Due to the
limitation of the length of the article, the experimental results of a
standard test function are presented here, which is the function shown in
formula (9). The minimum point of the function is 0, and the dimension is
D ¼ 30.
f1 ¼
XD
i¼0
x2
i (9)
Fig. 6 shows the relationship between the population diversity trend
and the function's ﬁtness value in 200 iterations. Fig. 7 shows the rela-
tionship between the population diversity trend and the function's ﬁtness
value in the 1000 iteration. As can be seen from Figs. 6 and 7, when f ðtÞ
shows an upward trend, the function converges quickly; when the di-
versity is not an upward trend, the function converges slowly, or the
ﬁtness value of the function is almost unchanged.
To describe the trend of diversity concretely, we use the least square
method to perform the linear ﬁtting for the W values
f ðt /C0 W þ1Þ; f ðt /C0 W þ2Þ; ⋯; f ðtÞ of each W generation. Thus, in each
iteration, we can obtain the slope of a ﬁtting line kðtÞ. When kðtÞ > 0, it
indicates that the diversity is increasing, and when kðtÞ < 0, it means the
variety is not growing.
4.4. Learning samples
In Section 4.3, we have obtained the Euclidean distance dg xi
between
each particle and the global optimal particle. dg xi
is normalized as
pg xi ¼ dg xi
dg x1
þ dg x2
þ ⋯ þ dg xN/C0 1
(10)
Take the reciprocal of the distance between each particle and the
global optimal particle 1 =dg xi
, and then 1 =dg xi
is normalized as
p
0
g xi ¼
1
.
dg xi
1=dg x1
þ 1
.
dg x2
þ ⋯ þ 1=dg xN/C0 1
(11)
Fig. 5. Example description of Euclidean distance relationships between various
paths during iterations.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
817

===== PAGE 6 / 14 =====
The ﬁtness value of each particle fitðiÞ is normalized as
qxi ¼ fitðiÞ
fitð1Þ þ fitð2Þ þ ⋯ þ fitðNÞ (12)
If kg xi represents a kind of comprehensive ability of the particle, the
closer it is to the global optimal particle, the greater the ﬁtness value and
the comprehensive ability are. Then kg xi can be expressed as
kg xi ¼ α1p
0
g xi þ α2 qxi (13)
k
0
g xi is used to represent another kind of comprehensive ability of the
particle. The farther it is away from the global optimal particle, the
greater the ﬁtness value and the comprehensive ability are. Then k
0
g xi can
be expressed as
k
0
g xi ¼ α1pg xi þ α2 qxi (14)
In selecting learning samples, we sort all particles based on kg xi and
k
0
g xi . Then we choose a certain number of learning samples according to
the actual situation of the algorithm. If it is in the exploration stage, the
sample with larger comprehensive energy kg xi is selected; if it is in the
development stage, the particle with larger kg xi and k
0
g xi is selected with
a certain probability to maintain the global and local search balance.
4.5. Algorithm model
Based on the above, we described in detail the proposed HL-PSO
model in this section. The main idea of the algorithm is hierarchical
interactive learning. That is, different levels of particles have different
learning strategies and learning samples.
According to the kg xi and k
0
g xi , we sort for all particles, and take the
biggest M particles as learning samples: y1; y2; ⋯; yM and y
0
1, y
0
2, ⋯; y
0
M
respectively.
For the global optimal particle, we set two learning strategies. When
kðtÞ > 0 (the population diversity is on the rise), the algorithm has a
strong exploration ability. We take the particle with a bigger kg xi as the
learning sample of the global optimal particle. That is to say, the global
optimal particle can learn from the particle with a large ﬁtness value
closer to it, to improve its local search ability. When kðtÞ/C20 0 (the pop-
ulation diversity shows a non-increasing trend), the particles of the larger
kg xi or k
0
g xi are selected as the learning samples of the global optimal
particles with a certain probability, to balance the global and local search
ability.
When kðtÞ > 0, the velocity update formula of the global optimal
particle can be expressed as
vgbest ðt þ 1Þ¼ wvgbest ðtÞþ c1r1 kg y1
/C0
y1 /C0 xgbest
/C1
þ ⋯ þ cM rM kg yM
/C0
yM /C0 xgbest
/C1
(15)
When kðtÞ/C20 0, the velocity update formula of the global optimal particle
can be expressed as
vgbest ðt þ 1Þ¼ wvgbest ðtÞ
þ⌊q þ r⌋
h
c1r1 kg y1
/C0
y1 /C0 xgbest
/C1
þ ⋯
þcM rM kg yM
/C0
yM /C0 xgbest
/C1 i
þð1 /C0 ⌊q þ r⌋Þ
h
c1r1k
0
g y1
/C0
y
0
1 /C0 xgbest
/C1
þ ⋯
þcM rM k
0
g yM
/C0
y
0
M /C0 xgbest
/C1 i
(16)
For other particles, we also design two learning strategies. When
kðtÞ > 0, the learning samples of this particle are the global optimal
particle position and the individual historical optimal position. When
Fig. 6. (a) The trend of population diversity in 200 iterations; (b) The trend of ﬁtness value in 200 iterations.
Fig. 7. (a) The trend of population diversity in 1000 iterations; (b) The trend of ﬁtness value in 1000 iterations.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
818

===== PAGE 7 / 14 =====
kðtÞ/C20 0, the learning samples of this particle are the global optimal
particle, the individual historical optimal position, and M/C0 2 particles
with bigger k
0
g xi . The learning strategies for the other particles are
described in detail below.
When kðtÞ > 0, the velocity update formula of the other optimal
particles can be expressed as
viðt þ 1Þ¼ ω viðtÞþ c1r1
/C0
xi /C0 xpbest;i
/C1
þc2r2
/C0
xi /C0 xgbest
/C1
(17)
When kðtÞ/C20 0, the velocity update formula of the other optimal particles
can be expressed as
viðt þ 1Þ¼ ω viðtÞ
þc1r1
/C0
xi /C0 xpbest;i
/C1
þ c2r2
/C0
xi /C0 xgbest
/C1
þð1 /C0 ⌊q þ r⌋Þ
h
c3 r3k
0
g y1
/C0
y
0
1 /C0 xgbest
/C1
þ ⋯
þcM rM k
0
g yM/C0 2
/C0
y
0
M/C0 2 /C0 xgbest
/C1 i
(18)
According to the experimental veri ﬁcation, we set other parameters
in this paper as w ¼ 0:6， r1;r2;⋯;rM 2½ 0; 1/C138 . In Equations (15), (16) and
(18), c1 þ c2 þ ⋯ þ cM ¼ 4;ci ¼ 4=M. In Equation (17), c1 ¼ c2 ¼ 2. In
Equations (16) and (18) , q ¼ 0:7.
The PSO algorithm is a stochastic algorithm where the initial posi-
tions and initial velocities of the particles are random values. Of course,
the range of its random values is different for different problems. For
example, in this paper we experimentally set the range of values of the
velocity to be one-tenth of the range of values of the position.
The pseudo-code of the improved algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
4.6. Experimental veri ﬁcation and result analysis
To verify the performance of the HL-PSO algorithm proposed in this
paper, we used a complex obstacle environment to conduct comparative
experiments on the basic PSO algorithm, CLPSO algorithm [ 39], SAL-
MPSO algorithm [ 40], and HL-PSO algorithm. We randomly generated
100 pairs of starting and ending points in the experiment, respectively.
We run the algorithm for 500 generations at a time and average the re-
sults by running the algorithm 100 times. The relationship between the
average length of 100 paths planned by the three algorithms and the
number of iterations was obtained, as shown in Fig. 8.
From Fig. 8 , we can see that the HL-PSO algorithm proposed in this
chapter has a faster convergence speed and higher accuracy. To further
compare the above four algorithms, we use Table 1 to show the average
length of successful paths planned by the four algorithms and the average
planning time. As seen in Table 1, although the basic PSO algorithm takes
the least time, it has the longest average length and the lowest success
rate of the successful path planned by it. The successful path here refers
to the collision-free safe path, and the success rate refers to the propor-
tion of the safe collision-free path. While the HL-PSO algorithm takes the
longest time, it has the shortest average length of the successful path and
the highest success rate. Besides, we can see that the average planning
time of CLPSO and SALMPSO is shorter than that of HL-PSO, but their
performance in terms of success rate and the average length of the suc-
cessful path is inferior to that of the HL-PSO algorithm. Because the al-
gorithm is designed for the global path planning of the UAV, the global
path planning attaches more importance to accuracy than the planning,
so the performance of the HL-PSO algorithm is better than the other three
algorithms. The endurance of each UAV's onboard energy storage is
fundamentally limited by its weight and aircraft size. HL-PSO algorithm
in this paper aims to ﬁnd a collision-free shortest path. The algorithm
convergence speed and accuracy of the HL-PSO algorithm are higher than
that of the PSO algorithm. Thus, by using HL-PSO, more energy from
UAV can be saved, and the time of endurance will be extended.
5. TSEB-DDPG algorithm
Given the UAV fast path planning problem in the urban environment
studied in this paper, UAV is regarded as an agent, and the empirical path
obtained by iterative optimization of the HL-PSO algorithm is used as the
guidance of the agent to advance. The improved DDPG algorithm is used
to train the fast path planning model. The model is described in detail
below.
5.1. Basic DDPG algorithm
The algorithm ﬂow diagram of the DDPG algorithm is shown in Fig. 9.
As shown in Fig. 9 , Actor gives a deterministic action strategy a
t ¼
μðst ; θμÞþ N ; after which the agent performs the action at , gets the
reward rt , and enters the next state stþ1. Actor stores the transition in-
formation ðst ; at ; rt ; stþ1Þ of the agent into the experience buffer D. N
Fig. 8. Comparison of the experimental results of the four algorithms.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
819

===== PAGE 8 / 14 =====
represents the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise. Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise is a
mean-reversion process, meaning states are pulled back when they
deviate from the mean.
The policy network μ and value network Q uniformly sample N
transition information in D to train their parameters. The loss function in
the Q network is de ﬁned as
L ¼ 1
N
X
i
/C0
yi /C0 Q
/C0
si; ai; θQ /C1/C1 2
(19)
Where yi is obtained by target policy network μ
0
and target value network
Q
0
. If the training is terminated in the ði þ 1Þth episode, yi¼ ri, else yi can
be expressed as
yi ¼ ri þ γQ
0 /C0
siþ1; μ
0
ðsiþ1 ; θμ
0
Þ; θQ
0 /C1
(20)
Where θμ and θQ are the parameters of the Actor and Critic network,
respectively, and θμ
0
and θQ
0
are the parameters of the target Actor and
Critic network, respectively.
After that, the Critic network is updated by minimizing the loss
function L in Equation (19). And then the sampling strategy gradient is
used to update the Actor network through the following formula
rθμ J /C25 1
N
X
i ra Q
/C0
s; a; θQ/C1 /C12/C12
s¼si ;a¼μðsi Þrθμ μðs; θμ Þjs¼si (21)
Finally, the two target networks are updated according to
θQ
0
← τθQ þð 1 /C0 τÞθQ
0
(22)
θμ
0
← τθμ þ ð1 /C0 τÞθμ
0
(23)
The pseudo-code of the DDPG algorithm is described in Algorithm 2.
The DDPG algorithm mainly includes several key points.
● The DDPG algorithm is a deep reinforcement learning algorithm
based on the Actor-Critic framework to solve the continuous control
problem.
● The DDPG algorithm uses the experience buffer to save the historical
transition data, and the data in the experience buffer is sampled and
trained by the deep neural network to obtain the parameters of the
Actor and Critic network.
● The DDPG algorithm uses the addition of noise to expand the explo-
ration space of action. The experience buffer is the key to combining
deep learning and reinforcement learning.
The experience buffer stores the past transition, accessed in the form
of advanced ﬁrst. The new transition is kept in the experience buffer, the
information on the remote transition is abandoned, and the capacity of
the experienced buffer is unchanged. During training, data in the expe-
rience buffer is randomly sampled. The buffer memory track in a period
can ensure the stable distribution of training data. Forgetting remote
trajectories ensures that the distribution of sampled data is most similar
to the current situation.
DDPG uses uniform sampling to sample the experience buffer in small
batches. This kind of uniform sampling will result in poor sample quality
and diversity, leading to low learning ef ﬁciency and a slow algorithm
convergence rate. In addition, in the process of learning, because the
action space of DDPG is added with regular noise, the DDPG algorithm is
not easy to jump off when the agent falls into a dilemma. We proposed a
three-step experience buffer DDPG algorithm based on the above reasons.
To improve the training speed and accuracy of the DDPG algorithm, we
designed three experience buffers for the DDPG algorithm: the excellent
transition buffer, the collision transition buffer, and the fast transition
buffer. In addition, we dynamically change the sampling ratio of each
experience buffer according to the training stage. The improved algo-
rithm is described in detail as follows.
5.2. Three experience buffers
The basic DDPG algorithm uses an experience buffer to store past
experiences. Each experience is represented by a quad ðst ;at ;rt ;stþ1Þ. The
meaning expressed by this quadruple is that the agent performs an action
Table 1
Performance comparison of four algorithms.
Algorithms Average length of the
successful path (m)
Average planning
time (s)
Success rate
(%)
PSO 9.81 82 78.6
CLPSO 9.73 96 81.3
SALMPSO 9.71 102 82.1
HL-PSO 9.61 113.6 86.1
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
820

===== PAGE 9 / 14 =====
at in state st , gets reward rt and moves to state stþ1.
Three experiential buffers are set up in the improved DDPG algo-
rithm: the excellent transition buffer, the collision transition buffer, and
the fast transition buffer. After the excellent global path information
obtained by the HL-PSO algorithm is converted to the quadruple infor-
mation matching the experience buffer, it is stored in the excellent
transition buffer. The collision transition buffer saves the collision in-
formation obtained from real training, which is recognized in the algo-
rithm training process and stored in the collision experience buffer in
time. The information stored in the fast transition buffer is the fast path
information, which is automatically stored in training, and its method is
the same as the basic DDPG algorithm.
There are three reasons for designing three different types of expe-
rience buffers.
● To improve the learning ef ﬁciency of agents, effective prior knowl-
edge must be added to the experience buffer. Without valid prior
knowledge, the agent can only learn by trial and error. If we set fewer
learning times for the agent during the training, it is possible that the
agent cannot complete effective learning at the end of the training,
which will directly lead to the failure of the training task. Even if we
set too many learning times for the agent, it will cause random trial-
and-error learning of the agent in the early stage of training, and it
will not be able to conduct ef ﬁcient learning. This will lead to prob-
lems such as low learning ef ﬁciency, non-convergence, and poor ac-
curacy. The above issues will become larger with the increase of the
action space of the agent. For continuous action space, making the
algorithm converge without prior knowledge as the guide is dif ﬁcult.
● To improve the knowledge reserve of the agent, it is necessary to
ensure the importance and diversity of the data sampled from the
experience buffer each time. In many operating environments of
agents, the changes in the environment may be very small, which
results in a very strong correlation of the track information ðst ; at ; rt ;
stþ1Þ in the experience buffer that is accessed and sampled sequen-
tially. It is impossible to distinguish the importance of each piece of
information, and important information will be lost under the FIFO
access mechanism. Therefore, to ensure that every kind of important
information is sampled, we specially prepared an excellent track
experience buffer for the excellent path information planned by the
HL-PSO algorithm. The agent not only needs to learn about good
experiences but also about bad experiences. Therefore, we have
prepared a collision experience buffer for the agent. The agent is
constantly exploring, trying, and making mistakes. The collision in-
formation will be stored in the collision experience buffer once
resolved.
● To improve the exploration ability of the agent, only excellent and
collision knowledge is not enough. Because imagination can some-
times produce new sparks of knowledge, if the agent is guided only by
excellent knowledge and collision knowledge, it would be controlled
by these two experts and lose its vitality. Therefore, in addition to
setting up the excellent transition buffer and collision transition
buffer to provide expert guidance for the agent, we also set up a fast
transition buffer to learn the track it has explored before.
5.3. Three-step sampling mechanism
To make the three experience buffers cooperate, we learned from the
process of children learning to walk to adjust the sampling proportion of
the three buffers adaptively. Children are held and led by their elders in
the early stage of learning to walk. When they encounter obstacles, they
will be reminded. However, children will sometimes lead their elders to
walk around according to their own will to explore the world. This stage
is called the toddler stage. When children can waddle, the elders will help
them occasionally and only remind them when they are about to fall or
tell them to be careful the next time they fall. This stage is called the
waddle stage. When children have learned to walk completely, the elders
no longer need to instruct them, and they can walk by themself. This
stage we call the victory stage. Drawing on this idea, we set the sampling
ratio of the three buffers in a step-by-step manner according to the
toddler stage, waddle stage and victory stage. Since the algorithm uses
stepped sampling in three stages of algorithm training, the sampling
mechanism is called a three-step sampling mechanism.
To describe the improvement strategy more clearly, let's ﬁrst make
some assumptions.
● Assume that the agent needs to complete training in Episode L.
● Before each training, the agent analyzes the average reward obtained
from the previous F training and uses the least square method to ﬁta
straight line for the average reward of the F training (in this paper, F
¼ 5). The slope of the line is set as p.
● According to the actual problem and the experimental situation, a
threshold value e1 is set for the slope p, and e1 is set as 1 in this paper.
● The average reward for excellent trajectories in the excellent transi-
tion buffer is Rbest .
The learning stage of the agent is divided according to the following
method. When p < e1 and the reward r /C20 Rbest , the agent is in the toddler
stage. When p /C21 e1, the agent is in the waddle stage. When the reward
r > v /C15 Rbest , the agent is in the victory stage. In this paper, v ¼ 0:5. The
sample ratio for each experience buffer is designed according to these
three stages.
Fig. 9. The ﬂow chart of DDPG algorithm.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
821

===== PAGE 10 / 14 =====
Assume that the total capacity of the experience buffer is C, and the
capacity of the excellent transition buffer, the collision transition buffer,
and the fast transition buffer are C1; C2, and C3, respectively. It must
satisfy C ¼ C1þC2 þ C3. If the mini-batch of samples from the experience
buffer is assumed to be N, then the number of samples from the three
buffers are N1; N2, and N3, respectively, and N ¼ N1þN2 þ N3 must be
satisﬁed. In this paper, C ¼ 1000, C1 ¼ 100, C2 ¼ 100; C3 ¼ 800, N ¼
100, and the values of N1; N2 and N3 are functions that change with the
increase of training times. Speci ﬁc settings of N1; N2 and N3 can be
expressed as
N1 ¼
/C26
0:5ðN /C0 iÞ; p < e1
0; p /C21 e1
(24)
N2 ¼
/C26
0:4ðN /C0 iÞ; r /C20 v /C15 Rbest
0 r > v /C15 Rbest
(25)
N3 ¼ N /C0 N1 /C0 N2 (26)
In other words, the excellent transition buffer only plays a guiding
role in the toddler stage. The collision transition buffer plays a guiding
role in both the toddler stage and the waddle stage, while the fast tran-
sition buffer plays a guiding role in all stages. In the victory stage, the fast
transition buffer independently guides the agent's learning.
The principle block diagram of the three-step sampling mechanism is
shown in Fig. 10 . The speci ﬁc process of the three-step sampling mech-
anism is shown in Fig. 11.
5.4. Reward mechanism
In this paper, it is assumed that the speed of the UAV is constant, and
the direction of motion of the UAV can be controlled by the turning Angle
φ , φ 2½ /C0 π;π/C138 . The motion space of the UAV is continuous, and its state is
its 2D coordinate. Since the motion space is continuous, the state space of
the UAV is also continuous. Because the state space is continuous, it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd the exact endpoint coordinates. In practical applications,
if the UAV is near the endpoint, we consider the UAV to have reached the
endpoint. Therefore, when the distance between the UAV and the
endpoint is less than the threshold value, we consider the UAV to have
reached the endpoint and give the UAV a large positive reward.
We combined the HL-PSO and the DDPG algorithm to meet the fast
and accuracy requirements of UAV path planning.
The reward mechanism is very important for the RL algorithm
because only under the positive guidance of reward strategy can an agent
successfully complete training. A reasonable reward strategy has a
practical guiding signiﬁcance for the UAV's next action. In the continuous
action space of the UAV, if the UAV is rewarded only when it ﬁnds the
endpoint, it will lead to too few positive samples and low learning ef ﬁ-
ciency. If the UAV gives a reward for every collision-free step, the process
reward will accumulate and overwhelm the target reward. This would
cause the UAV to stray from its target, score points by avoiding obstacles,
and fall into aimless, never-ending wandering. We design the following
reward mechanism to solve this problem based on the step-forward
relationship.
Assume that the starting point of a UAV is Start, the target point is
End, the coordinate of the current position is St , the coordinate of the
previous position is St/C0 1, and the total interval of static obstacles in the
UAV's walking process is Z. Then, the distance between St and End is
disðSt ; EndÞ, and the distance between St/C0 1 and End is disðSt/C0 1; EndÞ. The
system rewards the UAV in the following way:
● When St/C0 1 2 Z and St 2 Z, i.e., the UAV collides with an obstacle in
the ﬁrst step and fails to correct the obstacle in the last step, the UAV
is given a negative reward: Reward ¼/C0 d1.
● When St/C0 1 2 Z and St 62 Z, i.e., the UAV collides with an obstacle in
the ﬁrst step and avoids the obstacle effectively in the last step, the
UAV is given a positive reward: Reward ¼ d1.
● When St/C0 1 62 Z and St 2 Z, i.e., the UAV does not collide with the
obstacle in the previous step but bumps into the obstacle in the next
step, the UAV is given a negative reward because it has not learned
enough obstacle avoidance techniques: Reward ¼/C0 d1.
● When St/C0 1 62 Z, St 62 Z, and disðSt/C0 1; EndÞ < disðSt ; EndÞ, i.e., the UAV
does not collide with the obstacle in either step, but it is far away from
Fig. 10. Principle block diagram of three-step sampling mechanism.
Fig. 11. Sampling ﬂow chart of three-step mechanism.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
822

===== PAGE 11 / 14 =====
the target, therefore, the UAV is given a negative reward: Reward ¼
/C0 d1.
● When St/C0 1 62 Z, St 62 Z, and disðSt/C0 1; EndÞ > disðSt ; EndÞ, i.e., the UAV
does not collide with an obstacle one step ahead or the next, it gets
closer and closer to the target, so the UAV is given a positive reward:
Reward ¼ d1.
● To push the UAV towards End, when the UAV is approaching its
destination, it satis ﬁes disðSt ; EndÞ < k1. We give it a progressive
reward: Reward ¼ d2.
● If the UAV is very close to End, it satis ﬁes disðSt ; EndÞ < k2. It will be
given the maximum positive reward: Reward ¼ d3.
The above parameters d1, d2, d3, k1 and k2 can be debugged according
to actual application scenarios. They should meet the following re-
quirements: d1< d2 ≪ d3, k1 < k2.
After the above improvements, we can get the pseudo-code of the
TSEB-DDPG algorithm as described in Algorithm 3.
In theory, the improved DDPG algorithm in this paper will improve
the training speed and accuracy of the algorithm and increase the success
rate of the actual path planning task. We summarize the reasons as
follows.
● All kinds of prior knowledge are classi ﬁed and stored to ensure that
all kinds of knowledge are collected in each sampling, and the balance
of sampling data is guaranteed.
● A large amount of trial-and-error time will be reduced because of
prior knowledge.
● The stepwise withdrawal of prior knowledge will enable the agent to
maintain its vitality and will not fall into local optimality because of
prior knowledge.
6. Experiment and analysis
We set the number of training sessions to 1000, and the training
terminates when one of the following two conditions is met.
(1) The UAV reaches the end;
(2) The UAV took 2000 steps.
The learning rates of the Actor and Critic networks are 0.0001 and
0.001, respectively. The cumulative reward discount factor is 0.9. The
target Actor network and the target Critic network are updated every 100
steps with an update parameter
τ ¼ 0.001.
6.1. Comparison experiment of TSEB-DDPG algorithm and other DDPG
algorithms
In order to verify the performance of the proposed algorithm, we
applied the DDPG algorithm, IDDPG algorithm [ 41], PDP-DDPG algo-
rithm [ 42] and TSEB-DDPG algorithm to the simulation experiment of
UAV fast path planning.
Fig. 12 shows the comparison between the DDPG algorithm and the
TSEB-DDPG algorithm proposed in this paper.
Fig. 12 shows that the average returns of the two algorithms present
an irregular state of turbulence, and even the average returns become
smaller in the toddler stage. This is the result of free exploration in the
case of inexperienced agents. However, the TSEB-DDPG algorithm pro-
posed in this paper jumps from the toddler stage to the waddle stage
faster than the DDPG algorithm. In the waddle stage, its convergence rate
is faster than that of the DDPG algorithm, and it enters the victory stage
faster. After more than 200 episodes, the TSEB-DDPG algorithm con-
verges. However, the DDPG algorithm converges after 450 episodes, and
its average return is lower than the TSEB-DDPG algorithm. Therefore, the
TSEB-DDPG algorithm proposed in this paper is superior to the DDPG
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
823

===== PAGE 12 / 14 =====
algorithm in terms of convergence speed and accuracy.
Fig. 13 shows the experimental comparison between the IDDPG al-
gorithm and the TSEB-DDPG algorithm. IDDPG algorithm is improved on
the DDPG algorithm and adopts a variable capacity experience buffer. As
we can see from Fig. 13, compared with the DDPG algorithm, the IDDPG
algorithm has improved performance and faster convergence speed. But
compared with the TSEB-DDPG algorithm, its convergence speed is
slower, and its accuracy is lower.
Fig. 14 shows the experimental comparison between the PDP-DDPG
algorithm and the TSEB-DDPG algorithm. The PDP-DDPG algorithm se-
lects high-priority samples to train in the network, deleting similar
samples in the buffer and reserving a small number of rare samples
simultaneously, which greatly improves the quality and diversity of
samples. Therefore, it can be seen from Fig. 14 that the convergence
speed of the PDP-DDPG algorithm is also greatly improved compared
with the DDPG algorithm. But the convergence speed and accuracy of the
PDP-DDPG algorithm are lower than that of the TSEB-DDPG algorithm.
In summary, the TSEB-DDPG algorithm performs better than DDPG,
IDDPG and PDP-DDPG algorithms. The reason is that the TSEB-DDPG
algorithm breaks down the bottleneck of the DDPG algorithm one by
one in each learning stage of the training process to guide the algorithm
to converge quickly. Because of the guidance of excellent experience and
the timely exit of excellent experience, the algorithm's accuracy is
improved, and the vitality of the algorithm is ensured.
6.2. Simulation experiment and analysis of fast path planning for UAV
Compared to the HL-PSO algorithm, the convergence speed of the
DDPG algorithm is much higher. Once the DDPG algorithm is trained, it
can search for optimization quickly. In the era of arti ﬁcial intelligence,
we hope that the UAV can promptly respond to the requirements of the
environment and humans and complete the task with the optimal or sub-
optimal path.
Hardware conﬁguration for simulation experiments: GPU: Tesla K80
with 11 GB video memory; CPU: Intel(R) Xeon (R) CPU E5-2609 v4 @
1.70 GHz; experimental framework: Pytorch. We used the HL-PSO al-
gorithm, DDPG algorithm, and TSEB-DDPG algorithm respectively to
carry out fast path planning for the UAV in the 2D plane shown in Fig. 4.
Each algorithm planned 100 paths fast with a random starting point and
endpoint. A comparison of the average length of these paths, the average
time of path planning, and the success rate are shown in Table 2 . From
Table 2, we can see that the path planned by the HL-PSO algorithm has
the highest accuracy, but the algorithm takes the longest time. DDPG
algorithm takes the shortest time to plan the path, but its training time is
longer, and its accuracy is the lowest. Compared with the DDPG algo-
rithm, the TSEB-DDPG algorithm has a shorter training time and higher
accuracy. Compared with the HL-PSO algorithm, the TSEB-DDPG
algorithm can meet UAV's fast planning requirements. In addition, with
the complex UAV movement environment, the HL-PSO algorithm's
running time will increase exponentially. At the same time, the of ﬂine
training and online planning methods adopted by the TSEB-DDPG algo-
rithm can also meet the fast requirements in the case of a complex
environment. In addition, from the last column of Table 2 , we can see
that the TSEB-DDPG algorithm has the highest success rate in path
planning. Of course, if the HL-PSO algorithm is given more time, the path
planned by the HL-PSO algorithm will surely have a higher success rate.
However, since the problem targeted in this paper is fast path planning,
we set fewer iterations for the HL-PSO algorithm to optimize the path.
Therefore, the TSEB-DDPG algorithm has a higher cost performance than
the HL-PSO algorithm and the DDPG algorithm. As we can see from
Fig. 12. Performance comparison between DDPG and TSEB-DDPG algorithms.
Fig. 13. Performance comparison between IDDPG and TSEB-DDPG algorithms.
Fig. 14. Performance comparison between PDP-DDPG and TSEB-
DDPG algorithms.
Table 2
Path planning performance comparison of HL-PSO algorithm, DDPG algorithm
and TSEB-DDPG algorithm.
Algorithm Parameters Average
training
time
Average
planning
time (s)
Average
length of the
successful
path (m)
success
rate (%)
HL-PSO 500
episodes
115.6s 115.6 36.91 86.4
DDPG 1000
episodes
20.47h 9.98 45.65 81.2
TSEB-
DDPG
1000
episodes
23.73h 9.98 38.76 87.6
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
824

===== PAGE 13 / 14 =====
Table 2 , TSEB-DDPG outperforms other competitors in terms of path
planning time, length of planned paths and success rate.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, a three-step experience buffer DDPG algorithm is pro-
posed to solve the fast UAV path planning problem. The proposed TSEB-
DDPG algorithm guides agents to carry out effective training through
three kinds of prior knowledge. An excellent transition buffer provides an
excellent experience, a collision transition buffer provides a vigilant
experience, and a fast transition buffer provides an immediate experi-
ence. Three experience buffers adopt a stepped sampling mechanism,
enabling the agents to absorb prior knowledge while maintaining vital-
ity. Based on the extensive experiments, the results show that the TSEB-
DDPG algorithm can achieve the fastest convergence and the highest
accuracy. Compared to the HL-PSO algorithm, DDPG algorithm and
TSEB-DDPG algorithm for UAV fast path planning, it is found that the
TSEB-DDPG algorithm is the most cost-effective. Besides, this algorithm
can be extended to any single intelligent control problem with static
obstacles. However, the proposed algorithm can only perform the model
transfer for similar issues and fully retrain the model for different issues.
In the future, we will combine the DDPG algorithm with other intelligent
algorithms to improve the generality of the algorithmic model.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by the Hubei Provincial Science and
Technology Major Project of China (Grant No. 2020AEA011), in part by
the National Ethnic Affairs Commission of the People’s Republic of China
(Training Program for Young and Middle-aged Talents) (No:
MZR20007), in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 61902437), in part by the Hubei Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 2020CFB629), in part by the Application
Foundation Frontier Project of Wuhan Science and Technology Program
(Grant No. 2020020601012267), in part by the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities, South-Central MinZu University (No:
CZQ21026), and in part by the Special Project on Regional Collaborative
Innovation of Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region (Plan to Aid Xinjiang
with Science and Technology) (2022E02035)
References
[1] Y. Dong, E. Camci, E. Kayacan, Faster RRT-based nonholonomic path planning in
2D building environments using skeleton-constrained path biasing, J. Intell. Rob.
Syst. 89 (3) (2018) 387 –401.
[2] U. Orozco-Rosas, O. Montiel, R. Sepúlveda, Mobile robot path planning using
membrane evolutionary arti ﬁcial potential ﬁeld, Appl. Soft Comput. 77 (2019)
236–251.
[3] C. Cai, S. Ferrari, Information-driven sensor path planning by approximate cell
decomposition, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B
(Cybernetics) 39 (3) (2009) 672 –689.
[4] T.P. Tunggal, A. Supriyanto, N.M.Z. Rochman, I. Faishal, I. Pambudi, I. Iswanto,
Pursuit algorithm for robot trash can based on fuzzy-cell decomposition, Int. J.
Electr. Comput. Eng. 6 (6) (2016) 2863 .
[5] Y. Xinyi, Z. Yichen, L. Liang, O. Linlin, Dynamic window with virtual goal (DW-VG):
a new reactive obstacle avoidance approach based on motion prediction, Robotica
37 (8) (2019) 1438 –1456.
[6] J. Kennedy, R. Eberhart, Particle swarm optimization, in: Proceedings of ICNN'95-
international Conference on Neural Networks vol. 4, IEEE, 1995, November,
pp. 1942 –1948.
[7] X. Cai, Z. Hu, Z. Fan, A novel memetic algorithm based on invasive weed
optimization and differential evolution for constrained optimization, Soft Comput.
17 (10) (2013) 1893 –1910.
[8] M. Clerc, J. Kennedy, The particle swarm - explosion, stability, and convergence in a
multidimensional complex space, IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 6 (1) (2002) 58 –73.
[9] P. Sun, R. Shan, Predictive control with velocity observer for cushion robot based on
PSO for path planning, J. Syst. Sci. Complex. 33 (4) (2020) 988 –1011.
[10] S. Shao, Y. Peng, C. He, Y. Du, Ef ﬁcient path planning for UAV formation via
comprehensively improved particle swarm optimization, ISA Trans. 97 (2020)
415–430.
[11] Y. Dong, X. Zou, Mobile robot path planning based on improved DDPG
reinforcement learning algorithm, in: 2020 IEEE 11th International Conference on
Software Engineering and Service Science (ICSESS), IEEE, 2020, October,
pp. 52 –56.
[12] G.T. Tu, J.G. Juang, Path planning and obstacle avoidance based on reinforcement
learning for UAV application, in: 2021 International Conference on System Science
and Engineering (ICSSE), IEEE, 2021, August, pp. 352 –355.
[13] E.H. Houssein, A.G. Gad, K. Hussain, P.N. Suganthan, Major advances in particle
swarm optimization: theory, analysis, and application, Swarm Evol. Comput. 63
(2021) 100868 .
[14] Y. Shi, R. Eberhart, A modi ﬁed particle swarm optimizer, in: 1998 IEEE
International Conference on Evolutionary Computation Proceedings. IEEE World
Congress on Computational Intelligence (Cat. No. 98TH8360), IEEE, 1998, May,
pp. 69 –73.
[15] P.Y. Yang, F.I. Chou, J.T. Tsai, J.H. Chou, Adaptive-uniform-experimental-design-
based fractional-order particle swarm optimizer with non-linear time-varying
evolution, Appl. Sci. 9 (24) (2019) 5537 .
[16] C. Yang, W. Gao, N. Liu, C. Song, Low-discrepancy sequence initialized particle
swarm optimization algorithm with high-order nonlinear time-varying inertia
weight, Appl. Soft Comput. 29 (2015) 386 –394.
[17] M.S. Nobile, P. Cazzaniga, D. Besozzi, R. Colombo, G. Mauri, G. Pasi, Fuzzy Self-
Tuning PSO: a settings-free algorithm for global optimization, Swarm Evol. Comput.
39 (2018) 70 –85.
[18] X. Ye, B. Chen, L. Jing, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, Multi-agent hybrid particle swarm
optimization (MAHPSO) for wastewater treatment network planning, J. Environ.
Manag. 234 (2019) 525 –536.
[19] R. Lan, L. Zhang, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, X. Luo, A hierarchical sorting swarm optimizer for
large-scale optimization, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 40625 –40635.
[20] L.T. Al-Bahrani, J.C. Patra, A novel orthogonal PSO algorithm based on orthogonal
diagonalization, Swarm Evol. Comput. 40 (2018) 1 –23.
[21] X. Xia, Y. Tang, B. Wei, L. Gui, Dynamic multi-swarm particle swarm optimization
based on elite learning, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 184849 –184865.
[22] J. Ding, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang, Q. Ye, Y. Ma, A hybrid particle swarm optimization-
cuckoo search algorithm and its engineering applications, Math. Probl Eng. (2019)
1–12.
[23] C.X. Yang, J. Zhang, M.S. Tong, A hybrid quantum-behaved particle swarm
optimization algorithm for solving inverse scattering problems, IEEE Trans. Antenn.
Propag. 69 (9) (2021) 5861 –5869.
[24] X. Xia, L. Gui, G. He, et al., An expanded particle swarm optimization based on
multi-exemplar and forgetting ability, Inf. Sci. 508 (2020) 105 –120.
[25] X. Chen, H. Tian ﬁeld, C. Mei, W. Du, G. Liu, Biogeography-based learning particle
swarm optimization, Soft Comput. 21 (24) (2017) 7519 –7541.
[26] H. Chen, C. Wang, J. Huang, J. Gong, Ef ﬁcient use of heuristics for accelerating
XCS-based policy learning in Markov games, Swarm Evol. Comput. 65 (2021)
100914.
[27] T.P. Lillicrap, J.J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, et al., Continuous Control with Deep
Reinforcement Learning, 2015 arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971 .
[28] L.J. Lin, Reinforcement Learning for Robots Using Neural Networks, Carnegie
Mellon University (Ph. D. Thesis), 1992 .
[29] Y. Hou, L. Liu, Q. Wei, X. Xu, C. Chen, A novel DDPG method with prioritized
experience replay, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC), IEEE, 2017, October, pp. 316 –321.
[30] J. Li, T. Yu, X. Zhang, F. Li, D. Lin, H. Zhu, Ef ﬁcient experience replay based deep
deterministic policy gradient for AGC dispatch in integrated energy system, Appl.
Energy 285 (2021) 116386 .
[31]
Z. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Chen, W. Li, Asynchronous episodic deep deterministic policy
gradient: toward continuous control in computationally complex environments,
IEEE Trans. Cybern. 51 (2) (2019) 604 –613.
[32] T. de Bruin, J. Kober, K. Tuyls, R. Babu /C20ska, Improved deep reinforcement learning
for robotics through distribution-based experience retention, in: 2016 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2016,
October, pp. 3947 –3952.
[33] T. Rojanaarpa, I. Kataeva, Density-based data pruning method for deep
reinforcement learning, in: 2016 15th IEEE International Conference on Machine
Learning and Applications (ICMLA), IEEE, 2016, December, pp. 266 –271.
[34] A.W. Moore, C.G. Atkeson, Prioritized sweeping: reinforcement learning with less
data and less time, Mach. Learn. 13 (1) (1993) 103 –130.
[35] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, D. Silver, Prioritized Experience Replay, 2015
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952 .
[36] H. Xiang, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, Synthesized prioritized data pruning based
deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm improvement, in: 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Information and Automation (ICIA), IEEE, 2018,
August, pp. 121 –126.
[37] P. Li, X. Ding, H. Sun, S. Zhao, R. Cajo, Research on Dynamic Path Planning of
Mobile Robot Based on Improved DDPG Algorithm, Mobile Information Systems,
2021.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
825

===== PAGE 14 / 14 =====
[38] X. Zhang, L. Duan, Energy-saving deployment algorithms of UAV swarm for
sustainable wireless coverage, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 69 (9) (2020)
10320–10335.
[39] J.J. Liang, A.K. Qin, P.N. Suganthan, S. Baskar, Comprehensive learning particle
swarm optimizer for global optimization of multimodal functions, IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput. 10 (3) (2006) 281 –295.
[40] B. Niu, H. Huang, L. Tan, Q. Duan, Symbiosis-based alternative learning multi-
swarm particle swarm optimization, IEEE ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinf 14 (1)
(2015) 4 –14.
[41] Y. Liu, W. Zhang, F. Chen, J. Li, Path planning based on improved deep
deterministic policy gradient algorithm, in: 2019 IEEE 3rd Information Technology,
Networking, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (ITNEC), IEEE, 2019,
March, pp. 295 –299.
[42] H. Xiang, J. Cheng, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, Synthesized prioritized data pruning based
deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm improvement, in: 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Information and Automation (ICIA), IEEE, 2018,
August, pp. 121 –126.
S. Tian et al. Digital Communications and Networks 10 (2024) 813 –826
826