SOURCE: references/MainPaper/Autonomous_Free_Flight_Operations_in_Urban_Air_Mobility_With_Computational_Guidance_and_Collision_Avoidance.pdf
PAGES: 14



===== PAGE 1 / 14 =====
5962 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021
Autonomous Free Flight Operations in Urban Air
Mobility With Computational Guidance
and Collision Avoidance
Xuxi Yang and Peng Wei , Member , IEEE
Abstract— The use of electrical vertical takeoff and landing
(eVTOL) aircraft to provide efﬁ cient, high-speed, on-demand
air transportation within a metropolitan area is a topic of
increasing interest, which is expected to bring fundamental
changes to the city infrastructures and daily commutes. NASA,
Uber, and Airbus have been exploring this exciting concept
of Urban Air Mobility (UAM), which has the potential to
provide meaningful door-to-door trip time savings compared
with automobiles. However, the ability to manage many of these
eVTOL aircraft safely in a congested urban area presents a
challenge unprecedented in air trafﬁc management. In order
to enable safe and efﬁcient autonomous on-demand free ﬂight
operations in UAM, a computational guidance algorithm with
collision avoidance capability is designed and analyzed. The
approach proposed in this paper is to formulate this problem as
a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and solve it using an online
algorithm Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). For illustration,
a high-density free ﬂight airspace simulator is created to test the
proposed algorithm’s performance. Numerical experiment results
show that this proposed algorithm has fewer conﬂicts and near
mid-air collisions than Optimal Reciprocal Collision Avoidance
(ORCA), a state-of-the-art collision avoidance strategy.
Index Terms — Collision avoidance, motion planning,
unmanned autonomous vehicles.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
O
VER the past several years, there has been an increas-
ing interest in Urban Air Mobility (UAM) operations,
including NASA, Uber, and Airbus [1], [2]. Companies such
as Airbus, Bell, Embraer, Joby, Zee Aero, Pipistrel, V olocopter,
and Aurora Flight Sciences have been working to build and
test electric vertical takeoff and landing (eVTOL) aircraft. The
UAM operations are expected to fundamentally change cities
and people’s lives to reduce commute time and stress. In UAM,
orders of magnitude more aircraft than those operating today
would be required for this transportation mode to serve a
signiﬁcant proportion of the public [3]. In this paper, we focus
on creating a safe onboard guidance and collision avoidance
system for eVTOLs to operate in very-high-density air trafﬁc
Manuscript received February 7, 2020; revised May 24, 2020 and October 1,
2020; accepted December 3, 2020. Date of publication January 28, 2021;
date of current version September 1, 2021. This work was supported by the
National Science Foundation under Award 1565979. The Associate Editor for
this article was Y . Wan. (Corresponding author: Xuxi Yang.)
Xuxi Yang is with the Department of Aerospace Engineering, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA 50011 USA (e-mail: xuxiyang@iastate.edu).
Peng Wei is with the Department of Mech anical and Aerospace Engineer-
ing, George Washington University, Washington, DC 20052 USA (e-mail:
pwei@gwu.edu).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TITS.2020.3048360
conditions, through combining the power of onboard aircraft
intelligence (vehicle technology) and the advantage of the free
ﬂight idea (airspace operation concept).
The concept of “Free Flight” was proposed previously
for future air transportation a pplications because it has the
potential to cope with the ongoing congestion of the cur-
rent ATC system. It was shown in previous work [4], [5]
that free ﬂight with airborne separation is able to handle
a higher trafﬁc density by utilizing more airspace volume.
Besides, free ﬂight can also bring fuel and time efﬁciency
[6]. In a free ﬂight framework, it is implied that aircraft
will be responsible for their own separation assurance and
conﬂict resolution [6]. Although the loss of an airway structure
may make the process of detecting and avoiding conﬂicts
between aircraft more complex, previous studies [7] show that
detecting and avoiding conﬂicts in free ﬂight is potentially
feasible because of enablin g technologies such as Global
Positioning Systems (GPS), data link communications like
Automatic Dependence Surveillance-Broadcast (ADSB) [8],
Trafﬁc Alert and Collision Avoidance Systems (TCAS) [9],
and powerful onboard comput ation capability. In addition,
automated conﬂict detection and resolution tools [10] will be
required to aid pilots and ground controllers in ensuring trafﬁc
separation and conﬂict resolution.
In this paper, under the free ﬂight framework,
a computational guidance algorithm with collision avoidance
capability is proposed to guide the a ircraft to its destination,
where the aircraft dynamics is modeled based on the tandem
tilt-wing eVTOL (Airbus Vahana) from Airbus A
3 [11],
as shown in Fig. 1. The proposed algorithm in this paper uses
Markov Decision Process (MDP) and the Monte Carlo Tree
Search (MCTS) algorithm, where the input of this algorithm
is the current position and velocity of other surrounding
aircraft, and the position of the trip destination for the aircraft
we are controlling. Through obtained sensing information
of other aircraft, the controlled aircraft will perform online
sequential decision making to select actions in real-time with
onboard avionics computation. The series of actions will
guide the aircraft to reach its goal quickly and avoid potential
conﬂicts. The proposed algorithm provides a potential
solution framework to enable autonomous on-demand free
ﬂight operations in urban air mobility.
B. Related W ork
Decades of research have explored a variety of approaches
for designing collision avoidance systems for aircraft, which
can be categorized based on the following criteria:
1558-0016 © 2021 I EEE. Personal u se is perm itted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 / 14 =====
Y ANG AND WEI: AUTONOMOUS FREE FLIGHT OPERATIONS IN UAM WITH COMPUTATIONAL GUIDANCE AND COLLISION A VOIDANCE 5963
Fig. 1. Airbus Vahana with tandem tilt-wing conﬁguration during the cruise
phase [11].
1) Centralized/Decentralized [12]: whether the problem is
solved by a central supervising controller (centralized)
or by each aircraft indivi dually (decentralized).
2) Planning/Reacting [13]: the planning approach generates
feasible or even optimal pa ths ahead of time; whereas
the reacting approach typically uses an online collision
avoidance system to respond to dangerous situations.
3) Cooperative/Non-cooperative [12]: whether there exists
online communication betw een aircraft or between air-
craft and the central controller.
In the following, we will brieﬂy discuss the related work
categorized based on the ﬁrst criterion: centralized method and
decentralized method. The sec ond and third criteria will also
be discussed in each category.
In centralized methods, the conﬂicts between aircraft are
resolved by a central supervising controller. Under such sce-
nario, the state of each aircra ft, the obstacle information,
the trajectory constraint as well as the terminal condition
are known to the central controller (thus centralized meth-
ods are always cooperative), and the central controller in
return designs the whole individual trajectory for all aircraft
before the ﬂight, typically by formulating it as an optimal
control problem. These methods can be based on semidef-
inite programming [14], nonlinear programming [15], [16],
mixed-integer linear programming [17]–[20], mixed-integer
quadratic programming [21], se quential convex programming
[22], [23], second-order cone programming [24], evolutionary
techniques [25], [26], and particle swarm optimization [27].
Besides formulating this problem using optimal control frame-
work, roadmap methods such as visibility graph [28] and
V oronoi diagrams [29] can also handle the path planning
problem for aircraft. Howeve r, calculating the exact solu-
tions will become impractical when the state space becomes
large or high-dimensional. To address this issue, sample-based
planning algorithms are proposed, such as probabilistic
roadmaps [30], RRT [31], and RRT* [32]. These centralized
methods often pursue the globa l optimality of the solution.
However, as the number of aircraft grows, the computation
time of these methods typically scales exponentially. More-
over, these centralized planni ng approaches typically need to
be re-run, as new information in the environment is updated
(e.g., a new aircraft enters the airspace).
On the other hand, decentralized methods scale better with
respect to the number of agents and are more robust since
they do not possess a single point of failure. However, since
the agents act only on local information, the global optimality
of a decentralized control policy is often hard to achieve [33].
In decentralized methods, each airc raft’s conﬂicts are resolved
individually, which can be cooperative and non-cooperative.
Researchers have proposed several algorithms under the case
where the communication between aircraft can be successfully
established (cooperative) [34]. Algorithms in [35], [36] are
based on message-passing schemes, which resolve local (e.g.,
pairwise) conﬂicts without needing to form a joint optimiza-
tion problem between all members of the team. In [12],
every agent is allotted a time slot to compute a dynamically
feasible and collision-free pat h using mixed-integer linear
programming. In [37], the author recast the global optimization
problem as several local problems, which are then iteratively
solved by the agents in a decentralized way. In the Decen-
tralized Model Predictive Control approach [38], the aircraft
solve their own sub-problem one after the other and send the
action to other subsystems through communication.
The work in this paper focuses on scenarios where commu-
nication cannot be reliably established (non-cooperative) and
the aircraft will take action a t each time step based on the
sensor information. Many works fall in this category: Model
Predictive Control [39], [40] can be used to solve the collision
avoidance problem, but the computation load is relatively high.
Potential ﬁeld method [41] is computationally fast. However,
a navigation function is required to make it a complete path
planner [42], [43], which involves discretizing the conﬁgu-
ration space. With the help o f machine learning and rein-
forcement learning [44]–[47], collision avoidance algorithm
can have a promising performance, but usually needs much
time to train. Using the Monte Carlo Tree Search algorithm
to solve this problem [48] does not need model training, and
the algorithm can ﬁnish in any predeﬁned computation time.
However, the aircraft can only adopt several discretized actions
at each time step. Geometry based algorithms [49]–[52] can
also be applied for collision avoidance problem and the com-
putation time only grows linearly with the increasing number
of aircraft. The drawback of these geometric approaches is that
it typically cannot look ahead for more than one step (it only
pays attention to the current action and does not consider
the effect of subsequent actions). The outcome can be local
optimal in the view of the global trajectory.
This paper will formulate this guidance and collision
avoidance system as a MDP and solve this MDP using the
online algorithm MCTS. Similar works using MDP formu-
lation solve this problem ofﬂine in the pre-departure phase
[53]–[55] or online during the en route phase [56]. Ofﬂine
solvers require large computation time upfront to compute
the optimal policy for the full state space and discrete MDP
formulations. Ofﬂine methods are typically not adaptive to
the environment’s changes becau se the policy is determined
ahead of time. Also, the state space of many problems is
too large to adequately repres ent as a ﬁnite set of enumerable
states. Compared with ofﬂine methods, using longer onboard
computation time, onboard methods address the shortcomings
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 / 14 =====
5964 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021
of ofﬂine methods by planning only for the current state and
a small number of possible plans. Since onboard algorithms
only need to plan for the current state that can take any
continuous value, state discretization of MDP formulation is
not required. Onboard algorithms are also able to account for
changes in the environment because they are executed once
at each decision point, allowing for updates between these
points. There is also POMDP formulation for this problem
which aims to consider the state uncertainty due to the sensor
noise [57], where the authors use a search algorithm to solve
this POMDP. The major difference between this paper and our
work is that they use depth-ﬁrst search and do not consider
the state transition uncertainty, while we use the robust MCTS
algorithm to handle the dynamical model uncertainty through
simulations.
C. Contributions
In this paper, we propose an algorithm which is an extension
of previous work [48], where the authors formulate the com-
putational guidance problem with collision avoidance function
as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) and solve this MDP
using the Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) Algorithm. The
contributions of this paper are :
1) This paper proposed a computational guidance algorithm
that performs consistently better than the baseline algo-
rithm ORCA [52] under high-density air trafﬁc scenarios
with uncertainty, achieving the new state-of-the-art.
2) The algorithm used in this paper is a variation of
the MCTS-UCT algorithm. We truncate the tree search
process and use a heuristic value function to denote the
value of the intermediate node during the search process,
which improves the computation efﬁciency of the online
algorithm.
3) Comparing with previous works that focus on one vs.
one collision avoidance (one ownship vs. one intruder
aircraft), in this paper we show the proposed algorithm
provides a framework to handle an arbitrary number of
intruders, and present the numerical simulation results
up to 80 intruders. This provides the necessary step
to make the computational guidance algorithm more
practical.
4) Besides, the proposed algorithm is the foundation and
building block for the more general case of multiple
cooperative aircraft.
The structure of the paper is as follows: in Section II,
the background of MDP and MCTS will be introduced.
In Section III, the description of the problem and its mathemat-
ical formulation of MDP are presented. Section IV presents
the designed MCTS algorithm to solve this problem and a
brief description of applying the ORCA method to solve this
collision avoidance problem. The numerical experiment and
results are shown in Section V . Section VI conclude this paper.
II. B
ACKGROUND
A. Markov Decision Process (MDP)
Since the 1950s, MDPs [58] have been well studied and
applied to a wide area of disciplines [59]–[61], including
robotics [62], [63], automatic control [64], economics, and
manufacturing. In a MDP, the agent may choose any action
a that is available based on current state s at each time step.
The process responds at the next time step by moving into a
new state s
′ with certain transition probability and gives the
agent a corresponding reward r.
More precisely, the Markov Decision Process (MDP)
includes the following components :
1) The state space S which consists of all the possible
states.
2) The action space A which consists of all the actions that
the agent can take.
3) Transition function T (st+1|st, at) which describes the
probability of arriving at state st+1, given the current
state st and action at .
4) The reward function R(st, at, st+1) which decides the
immediate reward (or exp ected immediate reward)
received after transitioning from state s to state s′, due
to action a. In general, the reward will depend on the
current state, current action, and the next state. However,
the reward function may only depend on the current state
s
t , which will be the case in this paper.
In a MDP problem, a policy π is a mapping from the state
to one speciﬁc action (known as deterministic policy)
π : S → A
The goal of MDP is to ﬁnd an optimal policy π∗ that,
if followed from any initial state, maximizes the expected
cumulative immediate rewards:
π∗ = argmax
π
E[
T∑
t=0
R(st , at)|π] (1)
B. Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a method for ﬁnding
optimal decisions in a given domain by taking random samples
in the decision space and build ing a search tree according to
the results [65], [66]. It has already had a profound impact on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) approaches for domains that can be
represented as trees of sequential decisions, particularly games
and planning problems [67]–[69], including the current state-
of-art computer program AlphaZero in the Game of Go [70].
The basic MCTS process is building a search tree incremen-
tally and asymmetrically. For each iteration of the algorithm,
a tree policy is used to ﬁnd the most urgent node of the current
tree. The tree policy attempts to balance considerations of
exploration (look in areas that have not been well sampled yet)
and exploitation (look in areas which appear to be promising).
A simulation is then rolled out from the selected node and the
search tree is updated accordin g to the result. This involves
the addition of a child node corre sponding to the action taken
from the selected node and an update of the statistics of its
ancestors. Moves are made durin g this simulation according
to some default policy, which in the simplest case is to make
uniformly random moves. A great beneﬁt of MCTS is that the
values of intermediate states do not have to be evaluated, as for
depth-limited minimax search, w hich signiﬁcantly reduces the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 / 14 =====
Y ANG AND WEI: AUTONOMOUS FREE FLIGHT OPERATIONS IN UAM WITH COMPUTATIONAL GUIDANCE AND COLLISION A VOIDANCE 5965
amount of domain knowledge required. Only the value of the
terminal state at the end of each simulation is required.
III. P ROBLEM FORMULATION
A. Problem Statement
This paper aims to control an aircraft through a series
of actions so that the aircraft can arrive at its destination
while avoiding potential conﬂicts with other intruder aircraft
during the ﬂight. This is a sequential decision-making problem
that can be formulated as a MDP problem. In this MDP
problem, the action is decided directly from the state, which
incorporates all the information (the position and velocity of
intruder aircraft, the position of the destination) for the agent
to decide which action is optimal for the corresponding state.
In this paper, a high-density free ﬂight airspace scenario is
considered: one aircraft (the ownship) is equipped with the
MCTS algorithm and will try to avoid conﬂicts with other
intruder aircraft. Here the aircraft performance data is based
on Airbus Vahana aircraft [71].
When controlling the aircraft, only horizontal actions are
considered in this paper, which means all the aircraft will be
ﬂying at the same altitude and this problem can be solved
in two dimensions. This assumption makes it possible to
incorporate multiple ﬂight levels to deal with the high-density
air trafﬁc in UAM.
Besides, we also assume the aircraft can get the intruder
aircraft information (position a nd velocity) through the sensor
perfectly. Future work would include testing this algorithm’s
performance under different levels of measurement uncertain-
ties [72], [73].
The objectives for this speciﬁc MDP problem are two-fold:
the ﬁrst is to guide the aircraft to the goal state in a short time,
and the second is to avoid any conﬂicts between the controlled
aircraft and other intruder air craft. Therefore, the reward
function should be able to capture both two objectives.
Based on the above description, this problem will be mathe-
matically formulated as a MDP problem in the next subsection.
B. MDP F ormulation
1) State Space: The state includes necessary information for
decision making: the position and velocity of all the aircraft
including ownship and intruders, together with the goal posi-
tion. For the intruder aircraft k,w eu s e(i
(k)
x , i(k)
y ), (i(k)
v x , i(k)
v y ) to
denote its position and velocity. For the ownship, its position
(ox, oy), velocity (ov x, ov y), speed ov , heading angle oψ ,a n d
the bank angle oφ are included in the state. To sum up, if there
are n intruders, 1 ownship, and 1 goal, the current state will be
a vector of length 4×n+7×1+2. Note that the state variables
deﬁned here are continuous. In general, for a MDP with
continuous state variables, it is not clear how to best represent
the policy, since it is impossible to enumerate all possible
state-action mappings. For previous MDP-based algorithms to
solve conﬂict avoidance problems, some possible approaches
to represent the policy include using a grid-based discretization
of the state space S and the action space A [55], [74] or using
some policy compression techniques [75]. Comparing with
previous methods, the advantage of the MCTS algorithm is
Fig. 2. An example state of the MDP formulation.
that we do not need to discretize the state space. For each state,
the MCTS algorithm will generate an action for the aircraft to
follow in real-time.
Fig. 2 shows an example state of this MDP. This state
includes all the aircraft information in a 24 km × 24km map.
It should be noted that the displayed aircraft size in this
ﬁgure is not proportional to its size in the real world, which
is approximately 6m by 6m [71]. In this ﬁgure, the yellow
aircraft is the ownship, the red aircraft are the intruders, and
the green star is the goal position for the ownship.
2) Action Space: At the beginning of each time step
(5 seconds), the ownship can choose to change both its bank
angle and acceleration at certain rates.
For the bank angle, the ownship can choose to turn right,
turn left, or go straight. More precisely, the advisory for
the change of bank angle constitutes the action set A
φ =
{−5◦/s, 0◦/s,+5◦/s} where negative corresponds to right turn
and positive to the left turn. For the passenger comfort,
we restrict the bank angle to lie between −25◦ and 25◦.W h e n
the heading angle action leads the bank angle to go beyond
±25◦, the bank angle will be clipped to ±25◦.
For the acceleration, the ownship can choose one accelera-
tion from the action set Aa ={ −5m/s2, 0m/s2, 5m/s2}.S i m -
ilar to the bank angle, we restrict the speed to be in between
50m/s and 80m/s [76] following the aircraft performance data
of Airbus Vahana [11], [71], [77].
At each time step, the ownship will choose one action
(a
φ, aa) ∈ Aφ × Aa and the ownship will maintain the action
during this time step.
It is natural to consider a larger/continuous action set to
include more conﬂict resolution advisories. However, using
the MCTS algorithm to calculate the optimal action will be
more time consuming with the extended action space since
the tree size will grow exponentially with the number of
actions. Since computation time is a restrictive factor for
the online algorithm, some techniques are necessary for the
extended action space, such as truncated Monte Carlo search
algorithms [78], progressive widening strategy [79], [80], or a
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 / 14 =====
5966 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021
policy network to narrow down the search to high-value
actions [67]. In this paper, we use the current discretized action
space to keep our scope more focused.
3) Dynamical Model: Based on the current state and current
action, the following kinematic model will be used to compute
state transition for ownship :
˙ov = aa + ϵ˙v
˙oφ = aφ + ϵ˙φ
˙oψ = g tan oφ
ov
˙ox = ov cos oψ
˙oy = ov sin oψ (2)
where aa is the acceleration and aφ is the changing rate of
bank angle.
After the aircraft execute an advisory, a normally distributed
noise ϵ˙φ with a standard deviation of 4 ◦ will be added to the
bank angle, and a normally distributed noise ϵ˙v with a standard
deviation of 2m/s will be added to the speed. Similarly, for the
intruder aircraft, a normally distributed noise with a standard
deviation of 10 m will be added to its position at each time
step. The noises here aim to account for the uncertainties in
the environment and aircraft dynamics.
4) T erminal State: For the consideration of safety, the con-
ﬂict is deﬁned to be when the distance of two aircraft is less
than a minimum separation distance r min = 0.3 nautical miles
[81]. This separation standard was chosen using the deﬁnition
of well clear for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) according
to Cook and Brooks [82]. For large UAS in high-altitude
airspace, the Horizontal Miss Distance (HMD) is deﬁned as
0.66nmi. For small UAS (55lbs vehicle or less) in low-altitude
controlled airspace around airports, the horizontal separation
is set to be a HMD of 0.36nmi. Using those values as a
reference, the nominal spatial separation standards picked for
this UAM application are set to 0.3nmi horizontally. These
are tighter than UAS standards because it is assumed that
enhanced equipage capabilities will be installed onboard UAM
aircraft [81].
Based on the above separation requirements, the terminal
state of this MDP includes the following three different types
of states, which can be determined directly through the state
information.
1) The distance from ownship to any intruder is less than
r
min (referred to as a conﬂict state in the following);
2) The ownship ﬂies out of the map (referred to as a
boundary state in the following);
3) The ownship reaches the goal position (referred to as a
goal state in the following).
5) Reward Function: The goal in this paper is to make
an aircraft quickly reach its destination and avoid potential
conﬂict. These two objectives can be captured in the reward
function deﬁned as follows :
R(s) =
{
1, if s is goal state,
0, otherwise. (3)
With this reward setting, reaching a conﬂict state or a boundary
state before the goal state will terminate the whole process
with a reward of 0. Reaching a goal state will terminate
this process with a reward of 1. So when maximizing the
reward, the agent will try to reach the goal state and avoid
conﬂict states and boundary states. Therefore we do not need
to introduce a penalty for boundary states or conﬂict states.
IV . S
OLUTION METHOD
In this section, we will introduce our proposed solution
approach and the baseline method. We will describe how to
apply these methods to solve the formulated problem.
A. MCTS Algorithm
For the MDP formulated above, the most popular algorithm
in the MCTS family, the Upper Conﬁdence Bound for Trees
(UCT) [83], is used to solve this problem. UCT has some
promising properties: it is very efﬁcient and guaranteed to be
within a constant factor of the best possible bound on the
growth of regret (the regret is the expected loss due to not
selecting the best action), and it can balance exploration and
exploitation very well [83].
In the MCTS algorithm, the nodes in the search tree denote
the states in the state space of the MDP problem formulated
in Section III. In the remaining part of this paper, the state
and the node will be used interchangeably. The child nodes of
a node are all the possible next states (nodes) resulting from
different actions from the current state (node). Since there are
nine actions in the action space at each time step, each node
will have at most nine child nodes by executing these nine
different actions.
MCTS algorithm selects actions by lookahead search. Each
edge (s, a) of the search tree stores an action value Q(s, a)
and its visit count N(s, a). The tree is traversed by simulation,
starting from the root state, which is the current state we are
considering.
In selection step, the ownship will select a child node with
maximum value in Equation (4), so as to maximize the mean
action value
X j plus a uncertainty bonus :
UCT =
 X j + 2C
√
2l n n
n j
(4)
Here the ﬁrst term
 X j is referred as exploitation term, which
is directly from the formula
X j = Q j /n j (5)
where the number n j is the times the child node j has been
visited before and the value Q j is the total reward of all
playouts that passed through this child node (so that Q j /n j
is an approximation of the child node’s state-action value).
The second term 2 C√
2l nn/n j is referred as an exploration
term where n is the number of times the current (parent) node
has been visited, and C is a constant to balance the exploration
and exploitation. A higher C value will emphasize exploration
and a lower C value will encourage exploitation. It should be
noted that the value of C depends on the value scale of
 X j .
Since the value of C = 1/
√
2w a ss h o w nb yK o c s i sa n d
Szepesvari to satisfy the Hoeffding inequality with rewards
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 / 14 =====
Y ANG AND WEI: AUTONOMOUS FREE FLIGHT OPERATIONS IN UAM WITH COMPUTATIONAL GUIDANCE AND COLLISION A VOIDANCE 5967
in the range [0, 1] [84], it is reasonable to set C = 1/
√
2i n
this paper. With a reward range different than[0, 1], a different
value of C would be necessary.
If more than one child node has the same maximal value,
the tie is broken randomly [84]. Also, n j = 0 yields a UCT
value of ∞ , so that if a node is never visited before, it will
be assigned to the largest possible value, to ensure that every
child will be considered at least once [66].
The second step for the UCT algorithm is expansion,w h i c h
happens when the ownship is at a new node which it has never
visited before. This step is to add this new node to the current
tree under its parent node (the previous state), and setting its
visiting number to 1 and cumulative reward to 0.
The third step is roll out, which aims to estimate the value
for the newly added state in the expansion state. After a new
node is added to the tree, its value will be determined by
running a simulation to a terminal state following a random
policy, until reachin g a terminal state with a ﬁnal reward.
It should be noted that simulating to a terminal state usually
requires many steps, which is very time-consuming. This paper
will address this limitation of the MCTS algorithm in the next
subsection “Estimated Value Function”.
After an action is selected, the next state for the ownship
and intruder aircraft will be updated based on the dynamical
model in Equation (2).
The ﬁnal step of MCTS is backpropagation. After simulat-
ing the whole process to a terminal state, the ﬁnal reward and
visit count of all traversed edges are updated. Each traversed
edge accumulates the reward and increases the visit count by 1,
and we can get the mean state-action value from the total
reward and visit count.
One iteration of the above four steps is called one simu-
lation. If the computation time allows, sufﬁcient simulations
will be repeated, which can provide a good approximation for
the values of different nodes. When the simulation stops and
a decision needs to be made, the most promising node will
be selected based on the current information (set C = 0i n
Equation (4)).
Estimated V alue Function: One concern for the proposed
algorithm is that the ownship has limited time to run this
algorithm onboard, and it is vital for the ownship to compute
quickly to make decisions at each time step. Since simulating
this process to a terminal stat e usually needs many steps,
simulating this process to a ﬁxed search depth d is beneﬁcial to
reduce computation time in the roll out step. More speciﬁcally,
if the algorithm simulates to a ﬁxed search depth d and
reaches a non-terminal state, the agent will use the estimated
value function as the terminal reward and backpropagate this
reward information. An example of the state-action search tree
building is given in Fig. 3, where the search depth is ﬁxed at 2.
Intuitively, without any other information, a state should be a
good state if the ownship is close to the goal state. Based on
this intuition, the following estimated value function is used
for the non-terminal states, so that the ownship can judge the
goodness of any non-terminal state :
˜V(s) = 1 − d(o, g)
max d(o, g), if s is non-terminal state (6)
Fig. 3. Illustration of the state-action tree built in the MCTS algorithm with
search depth 2. For illustration purposes, we only consider three actions in
this case: turn left, turn right, and go straight. Here red node denotes the
conﬂict state; the green node denotes th e goal state. Yellow nodes mean that
the agent simulates to depth two and uses the estimated value function as the
ﬁnal reward for the non-terminal state, depending on the distance between
ownship and goal position. The state-action value of each node at time step
t + 1 is the average of all its child node values. Based on this illustration,
the agent will select to turn right at the current state s
t .
where d(o, g) denotes the distance from ownship to goal
position. max d(o, g) is the maximum distance from ownship
to the goal state, which is the diagonal distance of the map (if
the map has an irregular convex shape, we can use the diameter
of this convex shape). In this way, if there is no conﬂict
with intruder aircraft or the border (which has reward 0),
the ownship will get a positive reward between 0 and 1,
depending on how far the ownship is from the goal state.
The above procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. In this
pseudo code, we use v to denote the node and s to denote
the state information of node v. s(v) means the state of a
node and v(s) means the node created from state s. Q(v) is
the total reward of all playouts that passed through the node
v and N(v) is the times the node v has been visited before.
d(v) represents the search depth of the node v.
B. Optimal Reciprocal Collision Avoidance (ORCA) Method
A popular approach to this computational guidance prob-
lem is the Optimal Reciprocal Collision Avoidance (ORCA)
Method [52]. The ORCA method is an efﬁcient computational
algorithm and its safety has been demonstrated in realistic
applications [85], [86]. Similar to our algorithm, the ORCA
method is also a reaction-based method that speciﬁes one-step
action for the current geometric conﬁguration. In this part,
we present how to use the ORCA method to solve this problem
and compare its performance with the MCTS algorithm.
The basic idea of ORCA is that , at each time step, the own-
ship ﬁrst decides the conﬂict-free velocity set with all the other
aircraft for at least a preset amount of time τ, which we denote
as OR CA
τ. Next, the ownship will select its new velocity as
close as possible to its preferred velocity (which is the velocity
point directly to its destination) in the set OR CA
τ.
Since in our problem, we are only controlling one ownship
aircraft. So in contrast to the original ORCA paper [52] where
each agent will take half of the responsibility to remain on a
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 / 14 =====
5968 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021
Algorithm 1 MCTS-UCT Algorithm
1: function UCTSEARCH (s0)
2: create root node v0 with state s0
3: while within computational budget do
4: vl ← TREEPOLICY(v0)
5: reward ← DEFAULTPOLICY(s(vl))
6: BACKUP(vl, reward )
7: return a(BESTCHILD(v0, 0))
8:
9: function TREE POLICY (v)
10: while v is nonterminal and d(v) ≤ d do
11: if v not fully expanded then
12: return EXPAND(v)
13: else
14: v ← BESTCHILD(v, C)
15: return v
16:
17: function EXPAND (v)
18: choose a ∈ untried actions from A(s(v))
19: s(v′) = PROCEED(s(v), a)
20: add the new child v′ to v
21: return v′
22:
23: function BEST CHILD (v, c)
24: return argmax
v′∈children of v
Q(v′)
N(v′) + c
√
2l n N(v)
N(v′)
25:
26: function DEFAULT POLICY (s)
27: while s is nonterminal and d(v(s)) ≤ d do
28: choose a ∈ A(s) uniformly at random
29: s ← PROCEED(s, a)
30: return reward for state s
31:
32: function BACKUP (v, reward )
33: while v is not null do
34: N(v) ← N(v) + 1
35: Q(v) ← Q(v) + reward
36: v ← parent of v
37:
38: function PROCEED (s, a)
39: s′ ← next state from current s, a
40: d(v(s′)) ← d(v(s)) + 1
41: return s′
collision-free trajectory, in th is paper we let the ownship take
the full responsibility when selecting the conﬂict-free velocity.
Besides, since we are controlling the eVTOL aircraft,
the selected velocities also need to satisfy the dynamic con-
straint. Speciﬁcally, we restrict the ownship to select the
velocity with speed in the range (v − 5m/s,v + 5m/s) where
v is the current speed of the ownship. One drawback of
the ORCA algorithm is that it always selects the velocity
directly and cannot incorporate the bank angle model in a
straightforward way. So here we restrict the ownship to select
velocity in the 10-degree ﬁeld of view, which means the
Fig. 4. Sample area of the aircraft f or ORCA algorithm, which we denote
as set S.
ownship can change its heading angle less than 10 ◦/s.T h i s
dynamics constraint is shown in Fig. 4, where the ownship
will select a velocity in the shaded area, which we denote
as set S. In this ﬁgure, θ is 20 ◦, vmin and vmax are chosen
to be v − 5m/s,v + 5m/s where v is the current speed of
the ownship. The the ORCA algorithm becomes the following
optimization problem
v
new = argmax
v∈OR CA τ ⋂ S
||v − v pre f || (7)
Since we are considering the dynamics constraint which
makes the feasible action space non-convex, the solution
approach using linear programming in the original paper [52]
is not applicable. We solve the above optimization problem
by the following approach . After calculating the set OR CA τ,
we sample N points uniformly in the set S. Among all the
sampled points, we choose one point in set OR CA τ that is
closest to the preferred velocity, as shown in Equation (7).
However, when air trafﬁc density is very high, the intersection
of OR CA
τ and S may be empty. In this case, we will select
the “safest possible” velocity for the ownship among the N
sampled points, i.e., the velocity that minimally “penetrates”
the constraints in set OR CA τ.
Here we note the differences between the MCTS algorithm
and the ORCA algorithm. First, the ORCA algorithm can
select any velocity in the shaded area while the MCTS
algorithm can only choose from 9 discrete actions at each time
step. We will show that the re duced action space compared to
ORCA does not hurt the performance of the MCTS algorithm.
Second, since the ORCA algorithm does not have a penalty
for the ownship ﬂying out of the map, we allow the ownship
to ﬂy out of the map and then ﬂy back while implementing the
ORCA algorithm. Third, since the original ORCA algorithm
is proposed in the deterministic case and we are introducing
uncertainties in this paper, we increase the conﬂict radius
of each aircraft to give the ORCA an extra buffer to avoid
conﬂicts between aircraft.
V. N
UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
A. Simulator
To test the performance of the proposed algorithm and
the baseline algorithm, an airspace simulator was built in
Python where the aircraft can ﬂy freely in the two-dimensional
en route airspace. The airspace has 24km length and 24km
width, which is designed for future Urban Air Mobility free
ﬂight operations. The algorithm’s assessment involves running
1000 episodes in this simulator and then taking the average of
the statistics as the algorithm performance. Here one episode
means the ownship ﬂying from its initial position to a terminal
state.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 / 14 =====
Y ANG AND WEI: AUTONOMOUS FREE FLIGHT OPERATIONS IN UAM WITH COMPUTATIONAL GUIDANCE AND COLLISION A VOIDANCE 5969
At the beginning of each episode, the initial position of
the ownship is at the bottom right corner of the map, and
the initial speed of the ownship is set to 60 m/s, the initial
ﬂight direction is set to point directly to the center of the
map. Then a ﬁxed number of intruder aircraft are generated
with speed uniformly distributed between 50 m/s and 80 m/s
and heading angle uniformly distributed between 0
◦ and 360◦.
The goal position of the ownship is also uniformly generated
on the map.
With the above initialization, after each time step, the state
update for the ownship and the intruder aircraft will be based
on the dynamical model in Equation (2). When an intruder ﬂies
out of the map, a new intruder will be randomly generated in
the airspace to ﬁx the number of intruder aircraft. When an
intruder aircraft is generated , we prevent it from being too
close to the ownship, in which case the ownship might not be
able to avoid this intruder no matter what action it takes.
During the simulation, the total number of conﬂicts between
the ownship and intruder aircr aft will be recorded. When the
ownship reaches the goal state or ﬂies out of the map or
has a near mid-air collision with any intruder aircraft, this
episode will end and a new episode will start. The near mid-air
collision (NMAC) standard is deﬁned as 500 feet by the
Aeronautical Information Manual [87]. Note in this simulator,
when a conﬂict happens, we do not terminate this episode
but just record this conﬂict. Th is is because in a conﬂict state,
the MCTS algorithm can still work to guide ownship escaping
this conﬂict and avoid potential NMAC.
We also note that there is an airspace simulator from NASA
named Fe3 (Flexible engine for Fast-time evaluation of Flight
environments). It was used to test the performance of differ-
ent low-altitude high-density air trafﬁc operations [88]–[90].
In their simulator, the goal position and origin are on the
boundary of the map. This simulator is more suitable for
the case where big airspace was divided into several small
sectors and we only need to control aircraft in one small sector
to guarantee there is no conﬂict between aircraft. When the
aircraft exit the current sector and move into the next sector,
another controller will take over this aircraft. The simulator
used in this paper can be used in a scenario where bounded
airspace contains both static obstacles (walls or geofences) and
dynamic obstacles (intruders or birds), such as airspace above
a small city. In this case, the goal position and origin will be
in the same airspace region.
B. Results With Fixed V elocity Intruders
In the following experiments, we run 1000 episodes in the
simulator for each algorithm with different parameter settings,
where we keep the velocity of the intruder aircraft ﬁxed.
We record and compare the percentage of these 1000 episodes
where the ownship reaches the goal state successfully, the per-
centage of episode termination due to a NMAC, the average
conﬂicts in each episode, and the average running time for
each decision making step.
1) Performance of MCTS Algorithm With Different Parame-
ters: In the MCTS algorithm, two parameters are important
to this algorithm’s performance: the number of simulations n
that each time a decision needs to be made and the search
depth d, which is discussed in Section IV . In this experiment,
the number of intruders is varied from 10 to 80 with step 10,
the number of simulations is varied from 100 to 900 with step
200, and the search depth is chosen from 2, 3, and 4. Based on
the results and performance co mparison, the best parameters
n and d are chosen to conduct the second experiment.
Since the MCTS algorithm’s performance trend is consistent
for different numbers of intruder aircraft, in Fig. 5 we only
show the result where the number of intruder aircraft is 80.
The ﬁgure also includes error bars indicating 95% conﬁdence
interval of the Monte Carlo simulation results.
Fig. 5a, 5c, and 5c show that the search depth d = 2p e r -
forms worse than deeper search depths (the ownship reaches
fewer goal states and has more NMACs and conﬂicts). This is
because when the search depth is deeper, the ownship can look
further into the future and thus can take action to avoid the
conﬂicts foreseen in the further future. The search depth d = 3
and d = 4 do not show much difference from the results.
From Fig. 5a, 5b, and 5c, we also observe that the number
of simulations does not affect the performance much, which
implies that in this problem, the MCTS algorithm does not
need too many simulations to have an accurate approximation
of the action value.
The average running time in Fig. 5d is growing linearly
with the number of simulations, and the search depth is also
the main factor slowing down the algorithm because the search
tree is deeper.
Based on the results in Fig. 5, since increasing the search
depth d to 4 and increasing the number of simulations will
increase the computation time while cannot bring much per-
formance improvement, the number of simulations n = 100
and search depth d = 3 were chosen for the next experiment
to compare with ORCA algorithm.
2) Performance of ORCA Algorithm With Different Para-
meters: For the ORCA algorithm, the preset time τ decides
how long the agent can “see” in the future, and the number
of sampling points N decides the optimality of the selected
velocity. In this experiment, we did a stress test (maintain the
number of intruder aircraft as 80) for these two parameters
with different values, by setting τ to 30, 60, 90 and N to 10,
50, 100, 200. The result is shown in Fig. 6.
From Fig. 6 we can see that with a larger number of
sampling points, the perform ance is better with more reached
goals and fewer conﬂicts. However, the ORCA algorithm does
not show much improvement by increasing N from 100 to
200. Since the computation time is increasing linearly with
N, we choose N to be 100 for the next experiment. Also,
we choose the parameter τ to be 60 since from the result,
it performs slightly better than the other two in terms of the
reached goals.
3) Comparison Between MCTS, MCTS-Fast, ORCA Algo-
rithm: In this experiment, we change the number of intruder
aircraft from 10 to 80 with step 10 and compare the MCTS
algorithm and ORCA algorithm’s p erformance with the para-
meter values selected from the above experiments. Besides,
we also examine the performance of the MCTS algorithm in
an extreme case where the decision time is very short. In this
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 / 14 =====
5970 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021
Fig. 5. Performance of MCTS algorithm with different parameters when there is 80 intruder aircraft.
Fig. 6. Performance of ORCA algorithm with different parameters when there is 80 intruder aircraft.
extreme case, we only allow the MCTS to run 10 simulations
to build the search tree and then select an action. We call this
variant of the MCTS algorithm “MCTS-Fast”. We generate
1000 same episodes for the three algorithms and Fig. 7 shows
the performance results of al gorithm MCTS, MCTS-Fast, and
ORCA.
The three algorithms in Fig. 7 show similar patterns: with
the increasing number of intruders, the number of conﬂicts
and probability of having a NMAC are both increasing, and
the probability of reaching the goal state is decreasing. For
all three algorithms, the ownship can reach the goal state
with more than 90% in the 1000 episodes, and the average
conﬂicts in each episode are under 0.6, which means all three
algorithms are very effective at avoiding potential collisions.
In addition, when the intruder number is below a certain
threshold (approximately under 40), the ORCA and MCTS
algorithms can help the ownship reach the goal state without
encountering any NMAC for more than 99% of the time. Also,
with a limited computation time, the MCTS-Fast algorithm
shows a little performance loss, demonstrating the robustness
of the MCTS algorithm.
As shown in Fig. 7b and Fig. 7c, in terms of the percentage
of NMAC episodes and the number of average conﬂicts,
the MCTS algorithm performs better than the ORCA algo-
rithm, especially when the int ruder aircraft number is large
(air trafﬁc density is high).
Figure 7d shows that the computation time of all three
algorithms is growing linearly with the increasing num-
ber of intruder aircraft. On average, the MCTS algorithm
needs around 50ms to 60ms to generate the output action
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 / 14 =====
Y ANG AND WEI: AUTONOMOUS FREE FLIGHT OPERATIONS IN UAM WITH COMPUTATIONAL GUIDANCE AND COLLISION A VOIDANCE 5971
Fig. 7. Performance of MCTS, ORCA, MCTS-Fast w ith different number of intruder aircraft.
TABLE I
PERFORMANCE OF THE BASELINE
(the running time under 100ms i s acceptable for a real-time
decision-making system, given that the decision is made every
5 seconds), while the ORCA algorithm only needs 2ms to
ﬁnish the computation. This shows that the improved perfor-
mance of the MCTS algorithm comes at the price of longer
computation time.
In Table I, we show the result of the baseline where no
actions are taken for all of the aircraft (e.g., the aircraft
is ﬂying straight towards its goal), and plot the average
result over 1000 independent experiments. From this table,
we can see when no actions are taken, the ownship will
have a NMAC event in over 50% episodes. In each episode,
the ownship has 2 conﬂicts with other aircraft on average. This
baseline result shows the proposed computational guidance
algorithm’s promising performance under a high-density air
trafﬁc scenario.
C. Results With V arying V elocity Intruders
To understand the MCTS algorithm’s performance in more
realistic scenarios, in this subsection, we also conduct a numer-
ical experiment with the intruder aircraft that vary velocities
Fig. 8. A scenario with intruder aircraft that change heading stochastically.
stochastically. This more complicated scenario shows that
the MCTS algorithm can adapt to different behaviors of the
intruder aircraft, which is useful when the ﬂight intention
information is not available to the ownship.
In this experiment, the intruder aircraft follows the dynam-
ical model described in Equatio n (2). At each time step, there
is a 10% probability that the intruder aircraft will change
its bank angle at a rate uniformly distributed in the range
[−20
◦/s, 20◦/s]. Fig. 8 plots the resulting trajectory for this
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 11 / 14 =====
5972 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021
Fig. 9. Performance of MCTS algorithm with ﬁxed velocity intruders and varying velocity intruder.
case study, where the trail behind each aircraft represents its
historical trajectory.
To incorporate the trajectories uncertainties of the intruder
aircraft, in the MCTS algorithm, we implemented forward
projection to predict the near future position of the intruder
aircraft based on its current position and velocity. We also
highlighted other alternative trajectory prediction algorithms
[91]–[95], and we expect the performance of the MCTS
could be improved with a more accurate trajectory prediction
algorithm.
The numerical experiment results over 1,000 random
episodes for this scenario are shown in Fig. 9, which record
the average number of conﬂicts/NMACs in each episode.
The ﬁgure also includes error bars indicating 95% conﬁdence
interval of the simulation results. We can see that due to
the trajectory uncertainty of the intruder aircraft, the average
number of conﬂicts/NMACs is larger than scenarios with
ﬁxed velocity intruders. However, the statistics are still at
a low level, which shows the MCTS algorithm is robust to
different behavior patterns of the intruder aircraft. Note that
the experiment result variance in Fig. 9b is larger than the
variance in Fig. 9a, since the NMAC event is rarer in the
numerical experiment.
D. Discussions
Through the numerical simulation results presented above,
we can see that with a longer online computation time,
the MCTS algorithm performs better than the ORCA algorithm
in terms of the number of conﬂicts/NMACs. The reason is
that at each time step, ORCA selects an action that is only
based on the current state without considering the action for
the next state. While the MCTS algorithm can look ahead
for 3 steps (search depth is 3). When there are 9 actions
to choose at each time step, the ownship can estimate the
outcome up to 9
3 = 729 different action combinations (similar
to the illustration in Fig. 3, where the ownship can explore
7 different action combinations with search depth 2). With a
deeper search depth than the ORCA algorithm, the solution of
the MCTS algorithm is closer to the global optimum.
One limitation in this work is that we assume full observ-
ability, where the ownship can sense the intruder aircraft infor-
mation (position and velocity) perfectly. However, in practice,
Fig. 10. The trajectories generated by MCTS algorithm and ORCA algorithm
when there is no intruder.
when the state information b ecomes imperfect, some tech-
niques such as Kalman Filter or Partially Observable MDP
will be necessary to ﬁlter out the sensor noise.
We also observe another limitation of the MCTS algorithm
through the numerical experiment. In Fig. 10, we plot the
resulted trajectories by following the actions from the MCTS
algorithm and ORCA algorithm when there is no intruder
aircraft blocking the way to the goal position. In this case,
the ORCA algorithm can select a velocity pointing directly
to the goal position since the action space for the ORCA
algorithm is continuous (the shaded area in Fig. 4). MCTS
algorithm only has 3 ﬁxed turning rate of bank angle, which
makes it challenging to point directly to the goal position. This
will make the ownship keep changing the heading angle when
approaching the goal with extra fuel cost.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
A shift from human-centric air trafﬁc control systems
towards higher autonomy levels is required to enable safe and
efﬁcient Urban Air Mobility operations. This paper proposes
a computational guidance algorithm with collision avoidance
capability for autonom ous free ﬂight operations, which can
guide the eVTOL aircraft to its destination by controlling
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 12 / 14 =====
Y ANG AND WEI: AUTONOMOUS FREE FLIGHT OPERATIONS IN UAM WITH COMPUTATIONAL GUIDANCE AND COLLISION A VOIDANCE 5973
the bank angle and acceleration. The problem is formulated
as a Markov Decision Proces s (MDP) with uncertainty in
aircraft dynamics and the environment. This MDP is solved by
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm with an estimated
value function to reduce the computation time. Numerical
experiments in the airspace simulator with different intruder
aircraft behaviors show that our algorithm has promising
performance and outperforms the baseline algorithm Optimal
Reciprocal Collision Avoidance (ORCA) in dense air trafﬁc
scenarios. This proposed algorithm provides a potential solu-
tion framework to enable autonomous on-demand free ﬂight
operations in urban air mobility.
The contribution of this research is to provide a state-of-the-
art computational guidance algorithm with collision avoidance
capability. Furthermore, this research integrates the power of
onboard aircraft autonomy and the advantage of the free ﬂight
concept for airspace operations to enable safe and efﬁcient
ﬂight operations in on-demand urban air transportation.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has beneﬁted from discussions with Mykel
Kochenderfer at Stanford, Karthik Balakrishnan and Richard
Golding at A3 by Airbus, and Josh Bertram at Iowa State Uni-
versity. The authors would like to thank Mykel Kochenderfer
for inspiring the research idea, the A 3 Altiscope team for their
guidance and support throughout this work, and Josh Bertram
for the discussion on the numerical experiments.
R
EFERENCES
[1] L. Gipson. (2017). NASA Embraces Urban Air Mobility, Calls
for Market Study . Accessed: May 19, 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.nasa.gov/aero/nasa-embraces-urban-air-mobility
[2] (2017). Future of Urban Mobility . Accessed: May 19, 2020. [Online].
Available: http://www.airbus.com/newsroom/news/en/2016/12/My-
Kind-Of-Flyover.html
[3] E. R. Mueller, P. H. Kopardekar, and K. H. Goodrich, “Enabling airspace
integration for high-density on-demand mobility operations,” in Proc.
17th AIAA Aviation Technol., Integr ., Oper . Conf., Jun. 2017, p. 3086.
[4] J. M. Hoekstra, R. N. van Gent, and R. C. Ruigrok, “Designing for
safety: The ‘free ﬂight’ air trafﬁc management concept,” Rel. Eng. Syst.
Saf., vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 215–232, 2002.
[5] K. D. Bilimoria, S. R. Grabbe, K. S. Sheth, and H. Q. Lee, “Performance
evaluation of airborne separa tion assurance for free ﬂight,” Air Trafﬁc
Control Quart., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 85–102, Apr. 2003.
[6] M. S. V . V . Clari, R. C. J. Ruigrok, J. M. Hoekstra, and H. G. Visser,
“Cost-beneﬁt study of free ﬂight with airborne separation assurance,”
Air Trafﬁc Control Quart. , vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 287–309, Oct. 2001.
[7] C. Tomlin, G. J. Pappas, and S. Sastry, “Conﬂict resolution for air
trafﬁc management: A study in multiagent hybrid systems,” IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 509–521, Apr. 1998.
[8] S. Kahne and I. Frolow, “Air trafﬁc management: Evolution with
technology,” IEEE Control Syst. , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 12–21, Aug. 1996.
[9] W. H. Harman, “TCAS—A system for preventing midair collisions,”
Lincoln Lab. J. , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 437–457, 1989.
[10] J. Krozel and M. Peters, “Conﬂict detection and resolution for free
ﬂight,” Air Trafﬁc Control Quart. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 181–212, Jul. 1997.
[11] Z. Lovering. (2016). V ahana Conﬁguration Trade Study—Part I—
V ahana. Accessed: May 19, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://acubed.
airbus.com/blog/vahana/vahana-conﬁguration-trade-study-part-i/
[12] T. Schouwenaars, J. How, and E. Feron, “Decentralized cooperative
trajectory planning of multiple aircraft with hard safety guarantees,” in
Proc. AIAA Guid., Navigat., Control Conf. Exhib. , Aug. 2004, p. 5141.
[13] R. Siegwart, I. R. Nourbakhsh, and D. Scaramuzza, Introduction to
Autonomous Mobile Robots . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2011.
[14] E. Frazzoli, Z.-H. Mao, J.-H. Oh, and E. Feron, “Resolution of con-
ﬂicts involving many aircraft via semideﬁnite programming,” J. Guid.,
Control, Dyn., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 79–86, Jan. 2001.
[15] A. U. Raghunathan, V . Gopal, D. Subramanian, L. T. Biegler, and
T. Samad, “Dynamic optimization str ategies for three-dimensional con-
ﬂict resolution of multiple aircraft,” J. Guid., Control, Dyn. , vol. 27,
no. 4, pp. 586–594, Jul. 2004.
[16] P. J. Enright and B. A. Conway, “Discrete approximations to optimal tra-
jectories using direct transcription and nonlinear programming,” J. Guid.,
Control, Dyn., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 994–1002, Jul. 1992.
[17] T. Schouwenaars, B. De Moor, E. Feron, and J. How, “Mixed integer
programming for multi-vehicle path planning,” in Proc. Eur . Control
Conf. (ECC) , Sep. 2001, pp. 2603–2608.
[18] A. Richards and J. P. How, “Aircraft trajectory planning with collision
avoidance using mixed integer linear programming,” in Proc. Amer .
Control Conf., 2002, pp. 1936–1941.
[19] L. Pallottino, E. M. Feron, and A. B icchi, “Conﬂict resolution prob-
lems for air trafﬁc management systems solved with mixed integer
programming,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 3–11,
Mar. 2002.
[20] A. Vela, S. Solak, W. Singhose, and J.-P. Clarke, “A mixed integer
program for ﬂight-level assignmen t and speed control for conﬂict
resolution,” in Proc. 48h IEEE Conf. Decis. Control (CDC) Held Jointly
28th Chin. Control Conf. , Dec. 2009, pp. 5219–5226.
[21] D. Mellinger, A. Kushleyev, and V . Kumar, “Mixed-integer quadratic
program trajectory generation for he terogeneous quadrotor teams,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , May 2012, pp. 477–483.
[22] F. Augugliaro, A. P. Schoellig, and R. D’Andrea, “Generation of
collision-free trajectories for a qua drocopter ﬂeet: A sequential convex
programming approach,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. C onf. Intell. Robots
Syst., Oct. 2012, pp. 1917–1922.
[23] D. Morgan, S.-J. Chung, and F. Y . Hadaegh, “Model predictive control of
swarms of spacecraft using sequential convex programming,” J. Guid.,
Control, Dyn., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1725–1740, Nov. 2014.
[24] B. Acikmese and S. R. Ploen, “Convex programming approach to
powered descent guidance for mars landing,” J. Guid., Control, Dyn. ,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1353–1366, Sep. 2007.
[25] D. Delahaye, C. Peyronne, M. Mong eau, and S. Puechmorel, “Aircraft
conﬂict resolution by genetic algor ithm and b-spline approximation,” in
Proc. 2nd ENRI Int. Workshop ATM/CNS (EIWAC) , 2010, pp. 71–78.
[26] J. A. Cobano, R. Conde, D. Alejo , and A. Ollero, “Path planning
based on genetic algorithms and the M onte-Carlo method to avoid aerial
vehicle collisions under uncertainties,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom. (ICRA) , May 2011, pp. 4429–4434.
[27] M. Pontani and B. A. Conway, “Particle swarm optimization applied
to space trajectories,” J. Guid., Control, Dyn. , vol. 33, no. 5,
pp. 1429–1441, Sep. 2010.
[28] G. Hoffmann, D. G. Rajnarayan, S. L. Waslander, D. Dostal, J. S. Jang,
and J. C. Tomlin, “The stanford testbed of autonomous rotorcraft for
multi agent control (STARMAC),” in Proc. 23rd Digit. Avionics Syst.
Conf., vol. 2, 2004, Art. no. 12.E.4-121.
[29] J. K. Howlet, G. Schulein, and M. H. Mansur, “A practical approach to
obstacle ﬁeld route planning fo r unmanned rotorcraft,” in Proc. Amer .
Helicopter Soc. 60th Annu. Forum , Baltimore, MD, USA, Jun. 2004.
[30] L. E. Kavraki, P. Svestka, J.-C. Latombe, and M. H. Overmars, “Proba-
bilistic roadmaps for path planning in high-dimensional conﬁguration
spaces,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 566–580,
Aug. 1996.
[31] S. M. LaValle, “Rapidly-explor ing random trees: A new tool for path
planning,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Io wa State Univ., Ames, IA, USA,
Tech. Rep. (TR 98–11), 1998.
[32] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal
motion planning,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 846–894,
Jun. 2011.
[33] L. Pallottino, V . G. Scordio, E. Frazzoli, and A. Bicchi, “Probabilistic
veriﬁcation of a decentralized policy for conﬂict resolution in multi-
agent systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) ,
May 2006, pp. 2448–2453.
[34] S. Wollkind, J. Valasek, and T. Ioerger, “Automated conﬂict resolution
for air trafﬁc management using cooperative multiagent negotiation,” in
Proc. AIAA Guid., Navigat., Control Conf. Exhib. , Aug. 2004, p. 4992.
[35] O. Purwin, R. D’Andrea, and J.-W. Lee, “Theory and implementation
of path planning by negotiation for decentralized agents,” Robot. Auto.
Syst., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 422–436, May 2008.
[36] V . R. Desaraju and J. P. How, “Decentralized path planning for multi-
agent teams in complex environments using rapidly-exploring random
trees,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , May 2011,
pp. 4956–4961.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 13 / 14 =====
5974 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021
[37] G. Inalhan, D. M. Stipanovic, and C. J. Tomlin, “Decentralized opti-
mization, with application to multiple aircraft coordination,” in Proc.
41st IEEE Conf. Decis. Control , vol. 1, Dec. 2002, pp. 1147–1155.
[38] A. Richards and J. How, “Decentralized model predictive control of
cooperating UA Vs,” in Proc. 43rd IEEE Conf. Decis. Control ,v o l .4 ,
Dec. 2004, pp. 4286–4291.
[39] D. H. Shim and S. Sastry, “An evasive maneuvering algorithm for
UA Vs in see-and-avoid situations,” inProc. Amer . Control Conf. (ACC),
Jul. 2007, pp. 3886–3891.
[40] D. H. Shim, H. J. Kim, and S. Sastry, “Decentralized nonlinear model
predictive control of multiple ﬂying robots,” in Proc. 42nd IEEE Int.
Conf. Decis. Control , vol. 4, Dec. 2003, pp. 3621–3626.
[41] O. Khatib and L. Mampey, “Fonction decision-commande d’un robot
manipulateur,” Report, vol. 2, no. 7, p. 156, 1978.
[42] E. Rimon and D. E. Koditschek, “Exact robot navigation using cost
functions: The case of distinct spherical boundaries in e/sup n,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. , Apr. 1988, pp. 1791–1796.
[43] C. I. Connolly, J. B. Burns, and R. Weiss, “Path planning using
Laplace’s equation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. , May 1990,
pp. 2102–2106.
[44] Y . F. Chen, M. Liu, M. Everett, and J. P. How, “Decentralized non-
communicating multiagent collision avo idance with deep reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , May 2017,
pp. 285–292.
[45] M. Brittain and P. Wei, “Autonom ous separation assurance in an high-
density en route sector: A deep multi-agent reinforcement learning
approach,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf. (ITSC) , Oct. 2019,
pp. 3256–3262.
[46] S. Li, M. Egorov, and M. Kochenderfer, “Optimizing colli-
sion avoidance in dense airspace using deep reinforcement learn-
ing,” 2019, arXiv:1912.10146. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1912.10146
[47] J. Hu, X. Yang, W. Wang, P. Wei, L. Ying, and Y . Liu, “UAS
conﬂict resolution in continuous actio n space using deep reinforcement
learning,” in Proc. AIAA Aviation Forum , Jun. 2020, p. 2909.
[48] X. Yang and P. Wei, “Autonomous on-demand free ﬂight operations in
urban air mobility using Monte Carlo tree search,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
Res. Air Transp. (ICRAT) , 2018.
[49] S.-C. Han, H. Bang, and C.-S. Y oo, “Proportional navigation-based
collision avoidance for UA Vs,”Int. J. Control, Autom. Syst., vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 553–565, Aug. 2009.
[50] J.-W. Park, H.-D. Oh, and M.-J. Tahk, “UA V collision avoidance
based on geometric approach,” in Proc. SICE Annu. Conf. , Aug. 2008,
pp. 2122–2126.
[51] J. Krozel, M. Peters, and K. Bilimoria, “A decentralized control strategy
for distributed air/ground trafﬁc separation,” in Proc. AIAA Guid.,
Navigat., Control Conf. Exhib. , Aug. 2000, p. 4062.
[52] J. Van Den Berg, S. J. Guy, M. Lin, and D. Manocha, “Reciprocal n-body
collision avoidance,” in Robotics Research. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2011, pp. 3–19.
[53] S. Temizer, M. Kochenderfer, L. Kaelbling, T. Lozano-Pérez, and
J. Kuchar, “Collision avoidance for unmanned aircraft using Markov
decision processes,” in Proc. AIAA Guid., Navigat., Control Conf. , 2010,
p. 8040.
[54] M. Kochenderfer, J. Holland, and J . Chryssanthacopoulos, “Next gen-
eration airborne collision avoidance system,” Lincoln Lab. J. , vol. 19,
pp. 17–33, Jan. 2012.
[55] H. Y . Ong and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Markov decision process-based
distributed conﬂict resolution for drone air trafﬁc management,”J. Guid.,
Control, Dyn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 69–80, Jan. 2017.
[56] J. Bertram and P. Wei, “Distribut ed computational guidance for high-
density urban air mobility with cooperative and non-cooperative collision
avoidance,” in Proc. AIAA Scitech Forum , 2020, p. 1371.
[57] T. B. Wolf and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Aircraft collision avoidance using
Monte Carlo real-time belief space search,” J. Intell. Robotic Syst. ,
vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 277–298, Nov. 2011.
[58] R. Bellman, “A Markovian decision process,” Indiana Univ. Math. J. ,
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 679–684, 1957.
[59] W. Beranek and R. A. Howard, “Dynamic programming and Markov
processes,” Technometrics, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 120, Feb. 1961.
[60] D. J. White, “A survey of applicati ons of Markov decision processes,”
J. Oper . Res. Soc., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 1073–1096, 1993.
[61] E. A. Feinberg and A. Shwartz, Handbook of Markov Decision
Processes: Methods and Applications . New York, NY , USA: Springer,
2012, vol. 40.
[62] S. Koenig and R. Simmons, “Xavi er: A robot navigation architecture
based on partially observable Markov decision process models,” Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence Based Mobile Robotics: Case Studies of Successful
Robot Systems , pp. 91–122, 1998.
[63] S. Thrun, “Probabilistic robotics,” Commun. ACM , vol. 45, no. 3,
pp. 52–57, 2002.
[64] M. Mariton, Jump Linear Systems in Automatic Control ,M .D e k k e r ,
Eds. New York, NY , USA: CRC Press, 1990.
[65] R. Coulom, “Efﬁcient selectivity and backup operators in Monte-Carlo
tree search,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Games Berlin, Germany:
Springer, 2006, pp. 72–83.
[66] C. B. Browne et al. , “A survey of Monte Carlo tree search methods,”
IEEE Trans. Comput. Intell. AI in Games , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–43,
Mar. 2012.
[67] D. Silver et al. , “Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks
and tree search,” Nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, p. 484, 2016.
[68] D. Silver et al., “Mastering chess and Shogi by self-play with a general
reinforcement learning algorithm,” 2017, arXiv:1712.01815. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1712.01815
[69] A. J. Champandard. AIGameDev. (2014). Monte-Carlo Tree Search
in Total War: Rome II’s Campaign ai . [Online]. Available: http://
aigamedev.com/open/coverage/mcts-rome-ii
[70] D. Silver et al., “Mastering the game of go without human knowledge,”
Nature, vol. 550, no. 7676, p. 354, 2017.
[71] (Nov. 2018). Acubed V ahana . Accessed: May 19, 2020. [Online].
Available: http://evtol.news/aircraft/a3-by-airbus/
[72] C. Allignol, N. Barnier, N. D urand, G. Manfredi, and E. Blond,
“Assessing the robustness of a UAS detect & avoid algorithm,” in Proc.
12th USA/Eur . Air Trafﬁc Manage. Res. Develop. Seminar , 2017.
[73] H. A. P. Blom and G. J. Bakker, “Safety evaluation of advanced self-
separation under very high en route trafﬁc demand,” J. Aerosp. Inf. Syst. ,
vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 413–427, Jun. 2015.
[74] M. J. Kochenderfer and J. Chryssa nthacopoulos, “Robust airborne col-
lision avoidance through dynamic programming,” Massachusetts Inst.
Technol., Lincoln Lab., Cambri dge, MA, USA, Project Rep. ATC-371,
2011.
[75] K. D. Julian, J. Lopez, J. S. Brus h, M. P. Owen, and M. J. Kochenderfer,
“Policy compression for aircraft collision avoidance systems,” in Proc.
IEEE/AIAA 35th Digit. Avionics Syst. Conf. (DASC) , Sep. 2016,
pp. 1–10.
[76] P. Pradeep and P. Wei, “Energy optimal speed proﬁle for arrival of
tandem tilt-wing eVTOL aircraft with RTA constraint,” in Proc. IEEE
CSAA Guid., Navigat. Control Conf. (CGNCC) , Aug. 2018.
[77] Airbus. (2016). Acubed by Airbus Group . Accessed: May 19, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.airbus-sv.com/projects/1
[78] G. Tesauro and G. R. Galperin, “On-line policy improvement using
Monte-Carlo search,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 1997,
pp. 1068–1074.
[79] G. M. J. Chaslot, M. H. Winands, H. J. van den Herik, J. W. Uiterwijk,
and B. Bouzy, “Progressive strategies for Monte-Carlo tree search,” New
Math. Natural Comput. , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 343–357, 2008.
[80] X. Yang, W. Duvaud, and P. Wei, “Continuous control for searching
and planning with a learned model,” 2020, arXiv:2006.07430. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07430
[81] C. Bosson and T. A. Lauderdale, “Simulation evaluations of an
autonomous urban air mobility network management and separation
service,” in Proc. Aviation Technol., Integr ., Oper . Conf. , Jun. 2018,
p. 3365.
[82] S. P. Cook and D. Brooks, “A quantitative metric to enable unmanned
aircraft systems to remain well clear,” Air Trafﬁc Control Quart., vol. 23,
nos. 2–3, pp. 137–156, 2015.
[83] L. Kocsis and C. Szepesvári, “Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning,”
in Proc. Eur . Conf. Mach. Learn. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2006,
pp. 282–293.
[84] L. Kocsis, C. Szepesvári, and J. Willemson, “Improved Monte-Carlo
search,” Univ. Tartu, Estonia, Tartu, Estonia, Tech. Rep., 2006, vol. 1.
[85] D. Alejo, J. A. Coba no, G. Heredia, and A. Ollero, “Optimal reciprocal
collision avoidance with mobile an d static obstacles for multi-UA V
systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Unmanned Aircr . Syst. (ICUAS), May 2014,
pp. 1259–1266.
[86] P. Conroy, D. Bareiss, M. Beall, and J. van den Berg, “3-D reciprocal col-
lision avoidance on physical quadrotor helicopters with on-board sensing
for relative positioning,” 2014, arXiv:1411.3794. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1411.3794
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 14 / 14 =====
Y ANG AND WEI: AUTONOMOUS FREE FLIGHT OPERATIONS IN UAM WITH COMPUTATIONAL GUIDANCE AND COLLISION A VOIDANCE 5975
[87] Federal Aviation A dministration. (2017). Near Midair Collision Report-
ing. Accessed: May 19, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.
faraim.org/aim/aim-4-03-14-530.html
[88] M. Xue and J. Rios, “Initial study of an effective fast-time simulation
platform for unmanned aircraft system trafﬁc management,” in Proc.
17th AIAA Aviation Technol., Integr ., Oper . Conf., Jun. 2017, p. 3073.
[89] V . Bulusu, R. Sengupta, E. R. Mueller, and M. Xue, “A throughput based
capacity metric for low-altitude airspace,” in Proc. Aviation Technol.,
Integr ., Oper . Conf., Jun. 2018, p. 3032.
[90] M. Xue, J. Rios, J. Silva, Z. Zhu, and A. K. Ishihara, “Fe 3: An evaluation
tool for low-altitude air trafﬁc operations,” in Proc. Aviation Technol.,
Integr ., Oper . Conf., Jun. 2018, p. 3848.
[91] D. H. Williams and S. M. Green, “Flight evaluation of center-TRACON
automation system trajectory prediction process,” NASA Tech. Rep.
Server, Langley, U.K., Tech. Rep., 1998.
[92] M. Prandini, J. Hu, J. Lygeros, and S. Sastry, “A probabilistic approach
to aircraft conﬂict detection,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. ,v o l .1 ,
no. 4, pp. 199–220, Dec. 2000.
[93] W. Liu and I. Hwang, “Probabilistic trajectory prediction and conﬂict
detection for air trafﬁc control,” J. Guid., Control, Dyn. , vol. 34, no. 6,
pp. 1779–1789, 2011.
[94] S. T. Barratt, M. J. Kochenderfe r, and S. P. Boyd, “Learning proba-
bilistic trajectory models of aircraft in terminal airspace from position
data,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. , vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 3536–3545,
Sep. 2019.
[95] Y . Pang, H. Yao, J. Hu, and Y . Liu, “A recurrent neural network approach
for aircraft trajectory prediction with weather features from sherlock,”
in Proc. AIAA Aviation Forum , Jun. 2019, p. 3413.
Xuxi Yang received the bachelor’s degree in applied
mathematics from the Harbin Institute of Technol-
ogy. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
the Department of Aerospace Engineering, Iowa
State University.
He is also working as a Research Assistant
with the Intelligent Aerospace Systems Laboratory
(IASL), under the supervision of Prof. P. Wei. His
research interests include deep reinforcement learn-
ing, machine learning, decision theory, with appli-
cations in air trafﬁc control/management (ATC/M),
and UAS trafﬁc management (UTM).
Peng Wei (Member, IEEE) r eceived the Ph.D.
degree in aerospace engineering from Purdue Uni-
versity, in 2013. He is currently an Assistant Pro-
fessor with the Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, George Washington Univer-
sity, with courtesy appointments at the Electrical and
Computer Engineering Department and the Com-
puter Science Department. He is also leading the
Intelligent Aerospace Systems Laboratory (IASL).
By contributing to the intersection of control, opti-
mization, machine learning, and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence, he develops autonomy and decision support tools for aeronautics,
aviation, and aerial robotics. His current research interests include safety,
efﬁciency and scalability of decision making systems in complex, uncer-
tain, and dynamic environments. His recent applications include Air Trafﬁc
Control/Management (ATC/M), Airline Operations, UAS Trafﬁc Management
(UTM), eVTOL Urban Air Mobility (UAM), and Autonomous Drone Racing
(ADR). He is an Associate Editor of the AIAA Journal of Aerospace
Information Systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Kunsan National University. Downloaded on May 02,2026 at 13:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 