SOURCE: references/MainPaper/document.pdf
PAGES: 16



===== PAGE 1 / 16 =====
Vol.:(0123456789)
CEAS Aeronautical Journal (2025) 16:905–920 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13272-024-00789-9
ORIGINAL PAPER
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air 
mobility through simulation
Isha Panchal1 · Sophie F. Armanini1,2 · Isabel C. Metz3
Received: 24 May 2024 / Revised: 23 October 2024 / Accepted: 28 October 2024 / Published online: 6 December 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Urban Air Mobility is a new concept of regional aviation that has been growing in popularity as a solution to the issue of 
ever-increasing ground traffic. Electric vehicles with vertical take-off and landing capabilities are developed by numerous 
market companies as a result of the push toward environmentally sustainable aviation. The next stage in this development 
process would be to define the concept of operation of these conceptual aircraft and then to integrate them with the exist-
ing airspace once they are airborne. In addition to coordinating with conventional air traffic and other Urban Air Mobility 
vehicles, collision avoidance with uncooperative airspace users has to be addressed. Birds and drones of all sizes pose a 
serious risk to these low-flying aircraft. Innovative collision detection and avoidance techniques need to be employed due to 
the non-cooperative nature of these airspace users and different performance characteristics of Urban Air Mobility vehicles 
compared to classical fixed-wing aircraft. The aim of this study is to evaluate the concept of one such system by means of 
fast-time simulations. This system builds, similarly to the Airborne Collision Avoidance System, on safety envelopes and 
rule-based collision avoidance to prevent collisions with non-cooperative airspace members. The system is designed to work 
with all aircraft configurations used for Urban Air Mobility operations. To assess its influence on safety and capacity, different 
scenarios are modeled by varying parameters, such as intruder type, location, flight path. The parameters assessed are dif-
ferences in flight time and closest point of approach with and without the collision avoidance system in place. Moreover, the 
influence of different configurations of Urban Air Mobility aircraft on these parameters is analyzed. The results show that the 
separation between the ownship and intruder is increased substantially which leads to safe operations at bearable delay costs.
Keywords Air taxi · Birds · Drones · eVTOL · Conflict detection & resolution · Urban air mobility · Air traffic management
1 Introduction
Thanks to the recent urbanization, most people today live 
in cities [1]. Once nearby villages have developed into sub-
urban areas as a result of rapid growth of cities, these areas 
increase as well. Additionally, there has been a substantial 
increase in travel time in ground-based transportation sys-
tems which is expected to further increase, especially during 
peak times [2, 3]. To address this issue, numerous mobility 
options are being researched. Urban Air Mobility (UAM) 
is a potential solution that is hypothesized to meet various 
transportation needs by providing fast and on-demand travel 
options within and between (sub-)urban areas [4 ].
However, trying to solve one problem, by adding an addi-
tional segment to the already dense airspace, could lead to other 
challenges. The cruising altitudes of UAM aircraft, referring 
to air taxis carrying up to four passengers in this paper, are 
expected between 1,500 and 4,000 ft and cruise velocities rang-
ing from 110 to 322 km/h [5, 6]. These are the altitude bands 
most abundant with birds and drones [7, 8]. These pose a danger 
to the safe operation of UAM aircraft due to their non-coopera-
tive characteristics in collision resolution as well as the limited 
impact resistance requirements of UAM aircraft [9, 10]. An 
earlier paper by the authors proposed a concept for a UAM Col-
lision Avoidance System (UAM-CAS) for UAM aircraft con-
sidering these non-co-operating airspace members (NCOAMs) 
[11]. This UAM-CAS extends concepts for conventional conflict 
 * Isabel C. Metz 
 isabel.metz@dlr.de
1 TUM School of Engineering and Design, Technical 
University of Munich, Munich, Germany
2 Department of Aeronautics, Imperial College London, 
London, UK
3 Institute of Flight Guidance, German Aerospace Center DLR, 
Braunschweig, Germany

===== PAGE 2 / 16 =====
906 I. Panchal et al.
detection and resolution with non-cooperative airspace users 
such as drones (e.g. [29], [30] by additionally considering birds 
as potential opponents.
The main element of the concept is an operational decision 
tree including measures for strategic avoidance prior to flight 
and measures for tactical as well as emergency avoidance dur-
ing flight. Similar to the concept of Aircraft Collision Avoid-
ance System (ACAS) of traditional aviation [12], different 
levels of avoidance maneuvers are performed when an UAM 
aircraft’s safety envelope is penetrated by an intruder. Thereby, 
three-dimensional safety envelopes for the four most common 
configurations multicopter, lift to cruise, tilt rotor and vectored 
thrust were designed. A detailed description can be found in the 
previous work of the authors [11].
This work focuses on the evaluation of the concept men-
tioned therein. In the context of the work, ’Evaluation’ refers 
to the process of rigorously analyzing the collision avoid-
ance system for Urban Air Mobility (UAM) vehicles through 
simulations. The goal is to determine how well the system 
works in preventing collisions, its impact on flight safety, 
and its effects on operational efficiency. It is not to be con-
fused with ’Validation’, which would typically refer to the 
process of verifying that the conclusions drawn from a study, 
or the models and simulations used, accurately represent 
reality and can be trusted for practical use. It’s about ensur-
ing that the system or method being tested not only works as 
designed but also produces credible and reliable outcomes 
when applied to real-world scenarios. It was only possible to 
perform virtual simulations in the scope of this work. Vari-
ous reasonable assumptions were made in the models used, 
but an effort was made to be as close to real-life applications.
While it is considered as crucial to introduce operational 
measures to prevent collision between UAM aircraft and 
NCOAMs—birds or drones—any solution must also take into 
account economical aspects [10]. In the United States, the Fed-
eral Aviation Administration estimates that flight delays cost air-
lines 22 billion US Dollars yearly. More than half of the flights 
in the United States are late (taking account minor delays such 
as 5 minute or 10 minute delays) [ 13, 14]. In Europe, a flight 
delay costs 100 euros per minute on average [15]. This includes 
everything from extra fuel burn to compensation for passengers. 
UAM, which is envisioned as a solution to long queues of on-
ground traffic, needs to perform within a tight time schedule to 
prove its efficiency over conventional solutions. The use-case 
of an inter-city or intra-city air taxi is largely dependent on the 
time-saving aspect. Therefore, even delays of few minutes can 
be a make-or-break scenario. Moreover, with the current genera-
tion of electric on-board batteries, the maximum time of flight 
is limited. Therefore, it is crucial, to not only assess the safety 
impact of any novel concept but also its influence on capacity 
and punctuality of operations.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the proposed concept 
of UAM-CAS and to analyze the efficacy of its design. For 
this purpose, a sample flight plan of a shuttle service from an 
airport to a city center represents an UAM use-case [16] and 
simulated with various conditions in the BlueSky Open Air 
Traffic Simulator [17]. The simulations included the intru-
sion of predictable as well as unpredictable non-co-operating 
airspace member (NCOAM) at different locations along the 
flight planned route. To evaluate the influence of different 
safety envelopes, the scenarios were simulated for the four 
aircraft configurations considered in the original concept.
In the upcoming Sect.  2, the methodology to design and 
build the simulations is explained in detail. The parameters 
to be evaluated are presented. In Sect. 3, the results obtained 
from the simulations for all four configurations are stated 
and discussed. Finally, in Sect.  4, the results are evaluated 
and a summary along with the future scope is presented.
2  Methods
In the following Sect. 2.1, details on how the elements of the 
UAM-CAS are converted into simulation logic is explained. 
Section  2.2 provides more details about the simulation envi-
ronment used. Section  2.3 shows the breakdown of the vari-
ous variables and groups into four topical islands supporting 
the generalization of the UAM-CAS. In Sect. 2.4, the various 
phases of the flight and relevant functions which are carried 
out are introduced. Finally, Sect. 2.5 presents the parameters 
chosen to evaluate the results from the simulations.
2.1  UAM‑CAS
This section provides an overview of the UAM-CAS developed 
in the authors’ previous work [11], to be evaluated within this 
study to obtain proof of concept. An in-depth description can 
be found in the original study alongside a visualization of the 
overall avoidance system as shown in Fig. 1.
The UAM-CAS is based on safety envelopes, similar to 
the concept of ACAS used in conventional aviation [12]. 
The safety envelopes are composed of the caution, warn-
ing, and collision envelopes as seen in Fig.  2. Whenever an 
intruder penetrates one of these envelopes, a certain action is 
initiated. The actions are organized in a decision tree which 
is divided into strategic, tactical and emergency branches. 
The strategic phase takes place prior to the flight and as 
such during the ground phase. In case that NCOAMs are 
detected close to the take-off area and their movement clas-
sified as critical, the departure is delayed. The tactical and 
emergency phases are active in the airborne phase once the 
aircraft has initiated its flight. This is also the case when the 
safety envelopes are activated. An automated tactical maneu-
ver is started when an intruder enters the warning zone of the 
safety envelope. If the automated maneuver is not success-
ful, the human pilot must take control to avoid the entering 

===== PAGE 3 / 16 =====
907
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air mobility through…
into the collision zone. This is termed as the emergency 
maneuver. The size of the safety envelopes strongly depends 
from the aircraft—the key characteristics to consider are the 
size as well as the agility of individual configuration. The 
four configurations most often proposed for the use of UAM 
operations, namely multicopter, lift to cruise, tilt rotor and 
vectored thrust are considered in this study. 
It is to be noted that in the theoretical study of the con -
cept [11], the authors suggested a different arrangement of 
the safety envelope zones for forward and vertical flight: 
Intersecting circles meeting at a common point for forward 
flight and concentric circles for vertical flight. In contrast, 
the zones are organized as concentric circles for all phases 
of flight to facilitate the simulations within this work. The 
arrangement of concentric circles throughout the flight can 
lead to a slightly increased flight time.
2.2  BlueSky Open Air Traffic Simulator
To evaluate the presented concept of an UAM-CAS, its 
functionality was simulated in a fast-time simulator. For 
this purpose, the BlueSky Open Source Air Traffic simulator 
developed by Delft University of Technology was selected. 
BlueSky is an open source simulator used for research in 
Fig. 1  Decision tree showing the ground and airborne phases of the 
UAM-CAS, source: [11], used with permission
Fig. 2  Collision, warning and caution envelopes for various configurations in forward and vertical flight, source: [11], used with permission

===== PAGE 4 / 16 =====
908 I. Panchal et al.
domains of air traffic management and to optimize air traf-
fic flow [17]. Its open source character as well as the option 
to add functionalities in independent plugins made it suit-
able as a platform for this study. Relying on existing plugins 
for the representation of bird movement as well as collision 
detection in the simulator [18], multiple plugins were devel-
oped within this work to represent the UAM-CAS. These 
included plugins for collision avoidance, the visualization 
of aircraft and intruders with their flight paths as well as the 
definition of the safety envelopes depending on the UAM 
aircraft configuration.
During runtime, the simulation itself is operated from the 
main simulation window of BlueSky. An additional window 
provides the user with the current state of the UAM-CAS, 
currently active automated avoidance maneuvers or, in case 
of an emergency maneuver, the request for execution by the 
operator. During the simulation, all relevant parameters were 
logged and stored for analysis.
2.3  Variables of UAM‑CAS: Four Islands
The simulation tasks were divided into four topical sub-tasks 
called ISLANDS. Once defined, the individual components 
covered by each island can be swapped easily in case the 
same analysis needs to be performed for any other location 
or flight characteristics. Figure 3 shows the islands and their 
relations [11]. 
Island 1 is related to the flight path. Island 2 contains all 
characteristics of the ownship which need to be considered. 
Island 3 deals with intruder and their types. Island 4 contains 
the definition of the collision avoidance maneuvers. Out of 
the four islands, three are standalone and can be populated 
with content without any dependencies on the other islands. 
The last island 4 covering the maneuvers overlaps with the 
other three islands. 
1) ISLAND 1- Geography and Flight Path: In this island, 
all parameters related to the geography are taken into 
consideration. This includes, among others, the posi-
tion of the take-off and the landing vertiports, preferred 
and alternate routes to be flown and alternate landing 
vertiports.
2) ISLAND 2- Aircraft Type: This island deals with the 
ownship aircraft. The configuration to be considered 
must be clearly defined. For this study, the four configu-
rations like the multicopter, lift to cruise, tilt rotor and 
vectored thrust were modeled based on the pre-existing 
open-source kinematic aircraft performance model in 
BlueSky [19, 20] as well as information from Electric 
Vertical Take Off and Landing (eVTOL) manufacturers 
[21–24], as described in detail in [11]. Only the motion 
of the ownship through space is considered without 
reference to any study of external forces. Based on the 
configuration, the dimensions of the safety envelope also 
Fig. 3  UAM-CAS tasks grouped in four islands

===== PAGE 5 / 16 =====
909
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air mobility through…
differ. Some elements of the tactical collision avoidance 
logic are dependent on the information of the configura-
tion of the ownship. These are contained in that island 
as well.
3) ISLAND 3- Intruder Type and its Location: This island 
deals with the intruder and related factors like its type, 
trajectory and location of occurrence. All intruders 
are NCOAMs. The NCOAMs can display predictable 
behavior or can be unpredictable. Drone obeying Right 
of Way rules of the sky or birds flying away from the 
ownship due to noise or size is considered predictable 
behavior [25]. The intruder namely a drone or a bird 
is programmed to appear at various locations head-on, 
from the left or right or on the same path as the own-
ship. These directions are considered so that they can 
be linked to the conventional Right of Way rules of air. 
The trajectory of the intruder is pre-defined for repeat-
ability. Birds were assumed to be appearing on the route 
from the vicinity of Isar River, where they might be nest-
ing owing to their conservation of their natural habitat. 
Drones appeared in the vicinity of the Allianz arena, 
where they might be used for photography.
4) ISLAND 4- Avoidance Maneuvers: This island defines 
the collision avoidance maneuvers which are required to 
avoid encounters with NCOAMs. The incorporation of 
the required maneuvers within BlueSky is described in 
section  2.4
2.4  Simulation Set‑up and Scenarios
After implementing all information pertaining to the four 
islands in BlueSky, the scenarios are defined. The selected 
flight plan represents a shuttle service from the airport of 
Munich (EDDM V1) to the main railway station of Munich 
(MUC HBF V2). For an alternate landing site, various loca-
tions, such as the top of high-rise buildings, helipads of hos-
pitals, and big community grounds, are possible. For the 
demonstration in this study, the helipad on the Oberschleis-
sheim airport (EDNX) was selected as the dedicated alter -
nate vertiport V3 (EDNX V3). Figure  4 shows an overview 
of the flight routes. 
The general scenario, which is performed for each con -
figuration, is set up as follows: the UAM-CAS starts with 
a pre-flight strategic maneuver for an UAM aircraft at 
V1(EDDM). Before take-off, the pilot scans for intruders 
using available systems like avian Radio Detection And 
Ranging (RADAR) or Notice to Airmen (NOTAM). If 
intruder activity is detected on the regular route 1 and active 
for over five minutes, the scanning process is repeated for 
the alternate route 2 via V3. If that intruder activity pertains 
for over five minutes on route 2, the take-off is postponed 
for later consideration. Although longer, this approach is 
a preferable compromise to entirely canceling the flight. 
After take-off, the aircraft climbs to 1000 ft (304.8 m) above 
ground level (AGL). For the vertical phases, the climb rate 
of 1.7 m/s is applied for all configurations [21– 24]. Once 
the ownship reaches 1,000 ft, the forward flight phase of the 
mission is initiated. For the the forward flight, cruise speed 
of 78 m/s is applied. The flight is continued until an intruder 
appears which triggers the tactical or even emergency phase 
(Table  1) .
According to the decision tree, the strategic move is exe-
cuted on the ground and prior to flight. There are different 
steps that need to be taken in the tree’s strategic maneuver 
branch, depending on whether and where birds are present 
(see Fig.  5). It is assumed that a UAM aircraft with a vec-
tored thrust configuration is waiting at EDDM V1 for take-
off. The pilot scans the surroundings to ensure an obstacle-
free take-off path. It is anticipated that the pilot will have 
access to NOTAM or, if available, real-time sensing systems 
like avian RADAR, to obtain information about the invaders’ 
whereabouts. After analyzing this data, the pilot must wait 
five minutes in case that intruder activity was observed or 
reported on route 1. If there are no trespassers, the pilot can 
initiate the departure on time. The pilot may contemplate 
taking off and flying route 2 if the intruder activity on route 
1 does not stop after five minutes. However, route 2 will also 
Fig. 4  Vertiports, ownship with safety envelopes, available routes and 
location of intruders in scenarios 1–14 on the map view in BlueSky

===== PAGE 6 / 16 =====
910 I. Panchal et al.
undergo a similar check for intruder activity before to take-
off. The pilot will have to wait an additional five minutes if 
it turns out that route 2 is the subject of intruder activity. 
The pilot can take off using the alternate path if there are no 
trespassers. After five minutes, the pilot must check route 2 
again for signs of intruder activity. If the trespassers are still 
at the take-off location, the decision would be made to delay 
take-off and think about taking off later. This comprises the 
Delay on Ground which were listed in Table  3. 
Once the ownship is airborne, it flies toward V2. To eval-
uate the collision avoidance methods, NCOAMs which vary 
in type (drone or bird), their predictability and direction of 
approach would appear at a pre-defined time and pre-defined 
co-ordinates (locations 1–4 in Fig.  4). In every scenario, one 
ownship encounters one NCOAM. Once the NCOAM pen-
etrates the warning envelope, the automated tactical maneu-
ver begins. The ownship hovers or changes its direction of 
flight (based on its configuration). If this does not solve the 
problem, the human pilot has to intervene to avoid the colli-
sion. This is termed as the emergency maneuver. Once safe 
separation is ensured between the NCOAM and ownship, 
the mission is continued and the ownship will continue fly-
ing toward V2. The tactical and emergency maneuvers may 
cause disruptions in the original flight plan and can lead 
to increased flight time. This raise is used as indicator of 
the efficacy of UAM-CAS and is thus considered as Delay 
in Air. For an overall evaluation, the ground and airborne 
delays were added to get the Total Delay of Flight (Table 4).
When the ownship is at V1 and ready to depart, one of 
the strategic maneuver’s five branches must be true for 
take-off. For instance, as seen in Fig.  6, in the case of a 
vectored thrust ownship, it’s assumed no intruder activity 
is near the airport, making branch 1 true. If the ownship 
encounters intruders after take-off, it refers to the tactical 
maneuver segment for collision avoidance, offering seven 
options. Assuming the ownship faces a head-on conflict 
with a drone on route 1 and identifies it, the ownship, 
being of vectored thrust configuration, will turn right as 
dictated by branch 7 of the tactical segment. The conflict 
may resolve, or an emergency maneuver might be needed, 
with two possible outcomes in this segment. If there are no 
substantial issues, the pilot continues to V2. Summarizing, 
Table 1  Theoretical flight 
values of flight parameters of 
the vectored thrust ownship
Horizontal cruise Vertical climb Vertical descent Theoretical 
value for total 
flight
Distance on route 1: dR1 (m) 26000 304.8 304.8 26610
Distance on route 2: dR2 (m) 30000 304.8 304.8 30610
Ground speed of vectored thrust 
ownship: SVT  (m/s)
78 1.7 1.7
Time for route 1: tR1 = dR1∕SVT (s) 333.33 179.29 179.29 692
Time for route 2: tR2 = dR2∕SVT (s) 384.61 179.29 179.29 744
Fig. 5  The various locations of the intruder with respect to the ownship along with indication on whether they pose a danger

===== PAGE 7 / 16 =====
911
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air mobility through…
one true branch from each maneuver segment is required, 
leading to a total of 70 possible combinations (5 strategic 
options * 7 tactical options * 2 emergency options). This 
study simulates five scenarios for strategic maneuvers, 
seven for tactical, and two for emergency, considering 14 
cases in total. The total flight time is calculated by adding 
the times from these individual segments. 
In the first 13 scenarios, the automated systems along 
with the human pilot act to resolve the conflict as per the 
steps mentioned in the UAM-CAS logic. In scenario 14, 
the conflict is not resolved by tactical and emergency 
maneuvers and the intruder collides with the UAM air -
craft. This scenario is included to investigate the conse-
quences of a failure of the UAM-CAS. Table  2  provides 
an overview of all scenarios as well as a detailed descrip-
tion of the airborne-phase maneuvers. The scenarios are 
simulated for all 4 configurations.
UAM-CAS takes into consideration the individual flight 
physics and handling quality depending on individual 
aircraft configurations, particularly in terms of collision 
avoidance. Each configuration has its strengths and weak -
nesses, impacting collision avoidance capabilities and 
efficiency in different flight phases. For this study, the 
four configurations currently dominating the market are 
considered [21– 24]:
• Multicopter: This configuration is characterized by mul-
tiple propellers in a single plane. This configuration is 
most efficient for vertical operations but less so for cruise 
flight due to the absence of wings.
• Lift to Cruise: This configuration merges multicopter 
capabilities with those of standard aircraft for vertical 
take-off and cruise flight, offering a compromise between 
efficiency and noise emission.
• Tilt Rotor: This configuration utilizes slowly rotating 
multi-blade propellers to mitigate disadvantages, but 
faces challenges in technological complexity and transi-
tion flight dynamics.
• Vectored Thrust: Similar to tilt rotors but with enclosed 
motors forming a jet, offering advantages in long-range 
flights but requiring significant energy for hovering.
2.5  Test parameters to be evaluated
The 14 scenarios which were implemented in BlueSky, are 
a set of different situations that can happen during the flight 
of a UAM airport shuttle. To analyze the efficient operation 
of the UAM-CAS, the following parameters were evaluated 
in this study.
Closest point of approach To evaluate the efficacy of the 
UAM-CAS, one of the parameters to be analyzed from the 
series of simulations is the Closest Point of Approach (CPA) 
of the intruder with respect to the ownship. This is the short-
est distance between the ownship and the intrusion observed 
Fig. 6  Simulation screen view with Anaconda command prompt on the left and map view of BlueSky on the right of scenario 5

===== PAGE 8 / 16 =====
912 I. Panchal et al.
throughout the simulation. The scenarios were set up to result 
in a collision (i.e., CPA = 0 m) without any intervention by 
UAM-CAS. Hence, the recorded increase in CPA can be inter-
preted as the safety measure.
Time of simulated flight TS(S) and Delay in Air DA(S) 
Based on the distance and performance data of the aircraft, the 
theoretical total time of flight is calculated. For each scenario, 
a mission is simulated in BlueSky without any disturbance 
from the intruders. This is done to evaluate the performance 
model of the ownship used for the simulations. As is to be 
expected, the total time of this simulated undisturbed flight is 
exactly same as the theoretical total time of flight, the theoreti-
cal total time of flight serves as a benchmark to evaluate each 
of the scenarios requiring collision avoidance due to intruders.
3  Results and discussion
To evaluate the utility of the proposed UAM-CAS system, 
two parameters were evaluated namely CPA and total time of 
simulated flight TS(S).
As described, the delays were calculated for the ground 
(strategic) and airborne (tactical and emergency) phase sepa-
rately before combining them to obtain the values for the total 
delay.
3.1  Ground phase
3.1.1  Delay on ground: DS (S)
The ground phase consists of the amount of time the aircraft 
has spent on the ground at V1, ready for departure. The 
Table 2  Description of airborne phase maneuvers for each intruder scenario
Intruder scenario Automated avoidance maneuver once 
intruder enters caution envelope
Emergency maneuver once intruder 
enters warning envelope
Sce-
nario 
num-
ber
Type Intent / Behavior Location 
of con-
flict
Direction
1 Drone predictable 1 right Hover at position, Forward velocity = 
0, Drone has RoW
2 Drone unpredictable 1 right Hover at position, Forward velocity = 
0, Drone has RoW
Turn left
3 Drone predictable 1 left Continue flight, Ownship has RoW
4 Drone unpredictable 1 left Continue flight, Ownship has RoW Turn right toward V3- EDNX
5 Drone predictable 1 head-on Ownship of configuration - 4, turn 
right
6 Drone unpredictable 1 head-on Ownship of configuration-4, turn 
right
Continue going right toward V3- 
EDNX
7 Drone predictable 1 same direction If ahead of ownship, drone has RoW, 
change path
8 Drone unpredictable 1 same direction If ahead of ownship, drone has RoW, 
change path
Increase separation and continue on 
parallel path
9 Bird predictable 1 head-on Hover and descent to 800 ft, Forward 
velocity = 0
10 Bird unpredictable 1 head-on Hover and descent to 800 ft, Forward 
velocity = 0
Turn right toward V3-EDNX
11 Drone unpredictable 2 head-on Ownship of configuration - 4, turn 
right
Continue going toward V2- MUC HBF
12 Drone unpredictable 3 head-on Ownship of configuration - 4, turn 
right
Continue going toward V2- MUC HBF
13 Drone unpredictable 4 head-on Ownship of configuration - 4, turn 
right
Continue going toward V3- EDNX
14 Bird unpredictable 1 head-on Hover and descent to 800 ft, Forward 
velocity = 0
Turn right toward V3-EDNX

===== PAGE 9 / 16 =====
913
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air mobility through…
delay in duration between ready for departure and effective 
departure is caused by intruder activity in the vicinity of the 
vertiport and is independent of the aircraft configuration. 
As shown in Table  3 , there are five different outcomes pos-
sible as discussed in the previous work of the authors [11]. 
The best case to fly route-1 is at the scheduled departure 
time. The worst case to fly route-1 is with a delay of 300 s 
( or 5 min). In case that the aircraft has to switch to route 
2 due to intruder activity on route 1, take-off takes place 
the earliest after 360 s (6 min). If there is intruder activ -
ity on route 2 as well, then the take-off is delayed by 660 s 
(11 min) which is represented by scenario 12 and 13. In the 
worst case, the take-off is postponed to a later time if there 
is continued presence of intruders even on route 2 as well. 
As it can be seen in Table  2, the ownship flies on route 1 
toward V2 in scenarios 1–11 and 14. Therefore, it is implied 
that in scenarios, the worst case ground delay of 300 s would 
be considered and in scenarios 12–13, a worst case ground 
delay of 660 s would be considered. As the ownship is not 
yet moving, the parameter of CPA is not relevant. The delay 
calculated in Table  3 needs to be added to the delay of the 
airborne phase to evaluate the total flight delay.
3.2  Airborne phase
3.2.1  Closest point of approach (CPA)
In Fig.  7, the CPA values for scenarios with UAM-CAS and 
without UAM-CAS are compared for a vectored thrust own-
ship to analyze the safety effect of the UAM-CAS. It can be 
observed that except in scenario 10, in all other scenarios, 
there is a substantial increase in CPA when the UAM-CAS 
is active. This drop can be as high as 98 %. This indicates the 
value of an UAM-CAS to maintain a safe separation between 
aircraft NCOAMs. Without such a system, an intruder can 
come dangerously close to the ownship, causing a near miss 
if not a collision. 
In Scenario 10, a bird was encountered head-on en-
route V2. The automated tactical maneuver was to hover 
and descent to 800 ft, with zero forward velocity. Although 
hovering is an energy-intensive maneuver, it was chosen 
due to the unpredictable behavior of the bird. In this sce-
nario, the tactical maneuver did not resolve the conflict 
but made it even worse. The ownship got too close to the 
intruder which resulted in the CPA being low. The human 
operator took over and performed the emergency maneu-
ver and brought the ownship to safety (Fig.  8). 
After the in-depth analysis of the concept, the influ-
ence of the configuration is studied. It has been assumed 
that multicopter and lift to cruise configurations would use 
hover as a means of collision avoidance, whereas the tilt 
rotor and vectored thrust would turn (mostly right) to get 
out of harm’s way. Multicopter and lift to cruise configu-
rations have major thrust-generating components in the 
vertical axis, whereas tilt rotor and vectored thrust have 
thrust production mainly in the horizontal axis. This gives 
the respective aircraft more control in the thrust axis and 
therefore the collision avoidance is chosen in this manner. 
When looking at Fig.  9, it can be observed that, CPA has 
indeed increased for all four types of ownships. As defined 
in [11], multicopter and lift to cruise ownships descended 
to avoid a head-on collision with drones, whereas own-
ships of tilt rotor and vectored thrust type turned right. 
Both of these techniques resulted in successfully evading 
the intruder. The tilt rotor boasts the most extensive 3D 
envelopes, closely trailed by the vectored thrust configu-
ration. However, there’s a noticeable contrast in envelope 
dimensions between the multicopter and tilt rotor. The 
caution envelope of the multicopter, which is the biggest 
of the three envelopes, is even smaller than the warning 
envelopes of the other three configurations. This would 
imply that if a uniform envelope dimension were adopted 
for all the four configurations, than the multicopter would 
have to change direction of flight, velocity or altitude a lot 
earlier before the danger of the intruder was imminent, 
leading to inefficient flight performance. Unlike commer -
cial aviation, where aircraft within the same category typi-
cally shares similar configurations, the UAM landscape 
presents a varied scenario. This underscores the necessity 
of adopting a configuration-specific approach for UAM.
3.2.2  Simulated flight time TS (S) and Delay in Air DA(S)
From Fig.  10 for the vectored thrust ownship, it can be 
observed that the total time of simulated flight for most 
scenarios (except scenario 1 and 2) is nearly equal to the 
total time of theoretical flight with no intruders present 
Table 3  Outcome and causes in 
strategic avoidance in ground 
phase
Possible outcomes Cause Delay (sec)
Scheduled Departure on Route 1 NCOAM headed to Route 1 or in inner circle 0
Departure after delay of 5 min on Route 1 NCOAM stays in vicinity of Route 1 300
Departure after delay of 6 min on Route 2 NCOAM headed to Route 2 360
Departure after delay of 11 min on Route 2 NCAOM stays in the vicinity of Route 2 660
Flight is postponed NCOAM activity has not cleared infinite

===== PAGE 10 / 16 =====
914 I. Panchal et al.
(maximum difference of 93 s) Therefore, by adapting the 
proposed UAM-CAS, the ownship can maintain safe sepa-
ration from intruders without substantially prolonging the 
total flight time. As seen in Fig.  11, in scenario 1 and 2, the 
delay in flight is quite high, with a maximum difference 
of 531 s. This is due to the fact that the intruder, in this 
case, a drone entering the safety envelope from the right 
with respect to the motion of the ownship, lingers in the 
vicinity of the ownship for a longer time. The intruder, in 
this case a drone, coming from the right has Right of Way 
and therefore the tactical avoidance maneuver of a UAM 
aircraft (regardless of the configuration), to avoid collision 
with this type of an intruder is to hover in place. As long 
as the intruder is in the vicinity of the ownship, it will 
continue hovering. The time of hover might be a critical 
factor for eVTOL aircraft as the energy required to hover 
Fig. 7  Closest point of approach with UAM-CAS and without UAM-CAS for each intruder scenario
Table 4  Values of total delay for entire mission of different scenarios
Intruder scenario Delay Information
Scenario 
number
Type Intent / behavior Location of 
conflict
Direction Max delay in 
ground phase: 
DG(s)
Delay in airborne 
phase: DA(s)
Total delay dur-
ing entire mission: 
DT (s)= DG + DA
1 Drone predictable 1 right 300 531 831
2 Drone unpredictable 1 right 300 513 813
3 Drone predictable 1 left 300 1 301
4 Drone unpredictable 1 left 300 3 303
5 Drone predictable 1 head-on 300 29 329
6 Drone unpredictable 1 head-on 300 62 362
7 Drone predictable 1 same direction 300 64 364
8 Drone unpredictable 1 same direction 300 60 360
9 Bird predictable 1 head-on 300 32 332
10 Bird unpredictable 1 head-on 300 38 338
11 Drone unpredictable 2 head-on 300 3 303
12 Drone unpredictable 3 head-on 660 42 702
13 Drone unpredictable 4 head-on 660 11 671
14 Bird unpredictable 1 head-on 300 105 405

===== PAGE 11 / 16 =====
915
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air mobility through…
is more than the energy required for forward flight [ 26]. 
Therefore, the avoidance behavior needs to be optimized. 
Moreover, as seen in Fig.  12, the total time of simulated 
flight is almost similar or slightly more (maximum differ -
ence of 33 s) for scenarios with unpredictable intruders as 
compared to scenarios with predictable intruders. High-
lighting the influence of configuration, the delay in flight 
for the multicopter and lift to cruise configurations is more 
when compared to the other two configurations. This may 
be due to the fact that multicopter and lift to cruise use 
Fig. 8  Comparison of CPA for 
predictable and unpredictable 
intruders
Fig. 9  Comparison of CPA for all four types of ownships. The black bar shows the value of CPA for the vectored thrust ownship without an 
active UAM-CAS

===== PAGE 12 / 16 =====
916 I. Panchal et al.
combination of hover and descend maneuvers to resolve 
the conflict which is evident from Fig.  10.
If the delay is compared for all ownship types, as in 
Fig.  13, it can be observed that the delay is the highest for 
multicopter followed by lift to cruise ones. Ownships of 
multicopter and lift to cruise configurations transition into 
hover in case of the threat of head-on collision with a drone. 
Therefore, the aforementioned increase in the delay could be 
due to long hover times. The delay is the least for the tilt-
rotor configuration of the ownship. To avoid the intruder, the 
tilt rotor descends and this could be an influencing factor in 
the reduced delay.
Fig. 10  Total time of simulated flight for each intruder scenario
Fig. 11  Delay for each intruder scenario in the airborne phase. Note: Detailed description of the scenarios can be found in Table  2

===== PAGE 13 / 16 =====
917
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air mobility through…
3.2.3  Total delay for the entire mission DT (S)
The delay components of the ground phase and the airborne 
phase were summed up as shown in Table  4 to find the total 
delay for the entire mission for the vectored thrust own-
ship. In scenarios 1–11, the ownship flew on route 1, and as 
shown in Fig.  3, the worst-case delay for that route is five 
minutes. Therefore, DG(S) is 300 s for scenarios 1-11 and 
14. The ground phase delay is now added to the delay of the 
airborne phase DA(s) . For example, in scenario 9, the own-
ship faced a delay of 300 s on the ground and then another 
32 s to evade the head-on bird during flight, resulting in total 
delay for the entire mission to be 332 s. The maximum total 
delay DT (S) for all scenarios is obtained as shown in Table 4. 
In a similar manner, for route 2, the worst-case ground phase 
delay DG(S) is 660 s which corresponds to scenario 12 and 
13. The values are visualized in Fig. 14. It can be observed 
that the delay of the ground phase is the largest component 
Fig. 12  Comparison of total 
time of simulated flight for 
predictable and unpredictable 
intruders
Fig. 13  Comparison of delay in the airborne phase for all four types of ownships. Note: Detailed description of the scenarios can be found in 
Table 2

===== PAGE 14 / 16 =====
918 I. Panchal et al.
and substantially delays the airport shuttle operations when 
compared to the airborne delay. Hence, emphasis should be 
put on measures to minimize ground delays.
4  Conclusions
Within this study, a previously proposed UAM-CAS concept 
was evaluated and its efficacy was analyzed. Therefore, the 
parameters of CPA and delay were assessed for the four most 
common UAM aircraft configuration. From Sect.  3, it can 
be concluded that the ground phase is responsible for larger 
delays than the airborne phase. This could be counteracted 
by reducing the take-off delay duration of five minutes in 
case of critical NCOAM movement. In addition, patterns 
and time windows during which intruders are the most active 
near V1 should be studied and strategies be developed based 
on the situation present at the intended departure time. Sys-
tems like avian RADAR could facilitate the required detec-
tion and monitoring of birds [27, 28]. A prerequisite is a 
solid ground infrastructure with sufficient capacity for the 
harassment of wildlife and solutions to protect the area from 
NCOAMs.
On the other hand, with an average delay of 107 s, the air-
borne delays are mostly negligible, even at this early concept 
state. However, solutions to shorten the delays due to unpre-
dictable intruders need to be found. This is especially true 
for the multicopter and lift to cruise configurations which 
hover in case of observed intruders. In addition to requiring 
a lot of power, the delays also quickly accumulate. Hence, 
alternative avoidance maneuvers should be developed to 
counter the ground delays and analyzed with regard to their 
impact on safety and efficiency. For example, a workaround 
in these scenarios could be to re-evaluate the situation after 
a threshold time and avoid the conflict in air through change 
in heading or altitude. Such alternative maneuvers should 
be assessed in the context of the maneuvering capabilities 
of the different configurations and evaluated again through 
simulation. For the other scenarios and configurations, the 
delays are reasonable and UAM aircraft can be operated 
with the current generation of batteries when UAM-CAS is 
active. Moreover, the proposed maneuvers themselves can 
be successfully carried out. From Fig. 9, it can be concluded 
that using UAM-CAS, the CPA can be reduced substantially 
by an average of 72 %.
For an UAM-CAS like the one proposed here to be imple-
mented, several prerequisites need to be fulfilled. First, sen-
sors on the ground or in the air to reliably detect and identify 
NCOAMs are required. Second, to predict their movement 
in the near future to decide about the necessity of avoidance 
maneuvers, models need to be developed and thoroughly 
tested. Lastly, these elements, alongside the suggested 
refinements to the UAM-CAS should be evaluated for vari-
ous conditions, such as aircraft configurations, terrain char-
acteristics or weather. Additionally, factors like detection of 
false positives and true negatives, as well as delayed report-
ing when conflicts cannot be resolved immediately, must be 
taken into account. The predictability was also considered 
without any difficulties. It was assumed that the on-board 
sensors would be precise and functional throughout the mis-
sion. No uncertainties were taken into this work. Ensuring 
Fig. 14  Maximum total delay comprising of the ground phase component as well as the airborne phase component for each scenario for the 
entire mission

===== PAGE 15 / 16 =====
919
Evaluation of collision detection and avoidance methods for urban air mobility through…
satisfactory sensor reliability in reality would be paramount 
in future work.
The avoidance maneuvers could be further refined based 
on latest aircraft performance data. By performing further 
tests with other UAM configurations and with a bigger sam-
ple size of scenarios, more reliable results can be achieved. 
UAM-CAS could act as a basis for a novel Collision Detect 
and Resolution (CDR) method for eVTOL flight. Based on 
the evaluation of technological advancement, there is poten-
tial to explore the requirements for autonomous CDR. How-
ever, this exploration must be substantiated through rigorous 
testing, given the inherent high level of risk involved. Fur -
thermore, it’s conceivable that future iterations of existing 
UAM aircraft may exhibit improved performance character-
istics, necessitating a reevaluation of previously presented 
calculations.
In the hypothetical flight scenario, intruders were 
addressed singularly and only once per flight. For instance, 
the consideration of a flock of birds as an intruder is one 
such example. In this study, the discussion regarding birds 
focuses on individual instances. Further simulations could 
explore additional combinations and frequencies, evaluating 
actions outlined in the UAM-CAS logic. Refinement of the 
3D safety envelope is also feasible, allowing for more pre-
cise shapes such as tear drop-like configurations instead of 
circles to take into consideration the effect of relative motion 
during forward flight. This study proposes a pathway for the 
future integration of UAM, offering a potential avenue for 
realization in the near term
Author contributions I.P. set up the conceptual framework of the paper 
and performed the simulations. She led the writing of the manuscript. 
S.F.A. contributed to the study design as well as to the writing and 
revising of the manuscript. I.C.M contributed to the setting up of the 
simulations, the study design as well as to the writing and revising of 
the manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt 
DEAL.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest All authors certify that they have no affiliations 
with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial 
interest or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials dis-
cussed in this manuscript. The authors have no co+nflict of interest to 
declare that are relevant to the content of this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References 
 1. Law, C. M.: “The growth of urban population in england and 
wales, 1801-1911,” Transactions of the Institute of British Geog-
raphers, pp. 125–143, (1967)
 2. Bhatta, B.: Causes and Consequences of Urban Growth and 
Sprawl. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, (2010). 
[Online]. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 642- 05299-6_2
 3. Leduc, G.: et al., “Road traffic data: Collection methods and 
applications,” Working Papers on Energy, Transport and Climate 
Change, vol. 1, no. 55, pp. 1–55, (2008)
 4. Igbinobaro, O. V.: “Urban air mobility: Envisioning uam as an 
integrated form of future transport-a las vegas case study,” (2022). 
[Online]. https:// digit alsch olars hip. unlv. edu/ arch_ grad_ capst ones/ 
42
 5. Deloitte, “National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
(NASA) UAM Vision Concept of Operations (ConOps) UAM 
Maturity Level (UML) 4,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https:// ntrs. 
nasa. gov/ api/ citat ions/ 20205 011091/ downl oads/ UAM
 6. Patterson, M. D., Antcliff, K. R., Kohlman, L. W.: “A proposed 
approach to studying urban air mobility missions including an 
initial exploration of mission requirements,” in Annual Forum 
and Technology Display, no. NF1676L-28586, (2018)
 7. Dokter, A.M., Liechti, F., Stark, H., Delobbe, L., Tabary, P., Hol-
leman, I.: Bird migration flight altitudes studied by a network 
of operational weather radars. J. R. Soc. Interface 8 (54), 30–43 
(2011)
 8. Tang, L., Shao, G.: Drone remote sensing for forestry research and 
practices. J.For. Res. 26, 791–797 (2015)
 9. European Union Aviation Safety Agency, “Proposed means of 
complinace with the special condition vtol,” 2020, doc No: MOC 
SC-VTOL. Online: https:// www. easa. europa. eu/ sites/ defau lt/ files/ 
dfu/ propo sed_ moc_ sc_ vtol_ issue_1. pdf, accessed on 19 January 
2022
 10. Metz, I. C., Henschaw, C., Harmon, L.: “Flying in the strike zone: 
Urban air mobility and wildlife strike prevention,” Journal of 
AHS, vol. 69, (2024)
 11. Panchal, I., Metz, I. C., Ribeiro, M., Armanini, S.: “Urban air 
traffic management for collision avoidance with non-cooperative 
airspace users,” in 33rd Congress of the International Council of 
the Aeronautical Sciences (2022), (2022)
 12. Williams, E.: “Airborne collision avoidance system,” in Proceed-
ings of the 9th Australian workshop on Safety critical systems and 
software-Volume 47, (2004), pp. 97–110
 13. Rapajic, J.: Beyond airline disruptions: Thinking and managing 
anew. Routledge, (2018)
 14. Ball, M., Barnhart, C., Dresner, M., Hansen, M., Neels, K., 
Odoni, A., Peterson, E., Sherry, L., Trani, A., Zou, B.: “Total 
delay impact study: a comprehensive assessment of the costs and 
impacts of flight delay in the united states,” (2010)
 15. Z. Rezo, S. Steiner, and N. Brnjac, “Cost analysis of air traffic flow 
disruptions in europe,” in Aviation Management and Economics 
Conference (AMEC), vol. 6, 2019
 16. Asmer, L., Pak, H., Shivaprakasha, P., Schuchardt, B., Weiand, 
P., Meller, F., Torens, C., Becker, D., Zhu, C., Schweiger, K., 
Volkert, A., Jaksche, R.:“Urban air mobility use cases, missions 
and technology scenarios for the horizonuam project,” 08 (2021)
 17. Hoekstra, J. M., Ellerbroek, J.: “Bluesky atc simulator project: an 
open data and open source approach,” in Proceedings of the 7th 

===== PAGE 16 / 16 =====
920 I. Panchal et al.
international conference on research in air transportation, vol. 
131. FAA/Eurocontrol USA/Europe, (2016), p. 132
 18. Metz, I.C., Mühlhausen, T., Ellerbroek, J., Kügler, D., Van Gas-
teren, H., Kraemer, J., Hoekstra, J.M.: Simulation model to calcu-
late bird-aircraft collisions and near misses in the airport vicinity. 
Aerospace 5(4), 112 (2018)
 19. J. Sun, J. Ellerbroek, and J. M. Hoekstra, “Wrap: An open-source 
kinematic aircraft performance model,” Transportation Research 
Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 98, pp. 118–138, 2019. 
[Online]. Available: https:// www. scien cedir ect. com/ scien ce/ artic 
le/ pii/ S0968 090X1 83060 89
 20. Sun, J., Hoekstra, J. M., Ellerbroek, J.: “Openap: An open-source 
aircraft performance model for air transportation studies and sim-
ulations,” Aerospace, vol. 7, no. 8, (2020). [Online]. Available: 
https:// www. mdpi. com/ 2226- 4310/7/ 8/ 104
 21. “Volocopter GmbH 2019 ,” https:// www. voloc opter. com/ wp- conte 
nt/ uploa ds/ 20220 607_ VoloC ity_ Specs. pdf, 2019
 22. “Eve Air Mobility Eve V3 (concept Design) ,” https:// evtol. news/ 
embra er/, 2022
 23. “Joby Aviation S4 ,” https:// evtol. news/ joby- s4, 2022
 24. “Lilium Jet ,” https:// evtol. news/ lilium, 2022
 25. International Civil Aviation Organization, Rules of the Air, Annex 
2, tenth edition (2005)
 26. Finger, D. F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: “A review of configuration 
design for distributed propulsion transitioning vtol aircraft,” in 
Asia-Pacific International Symposium on Aerospace Technology-
APISAT, (2017), pp. 3–5
 27. McKee, J., Shaw, P., Dekker, A., Patrick, K.: “Approaches to 
wildlife management in aviation,” Problematic wildlife: A cross-
disciplinary approach, pp. 465–488, (2016)
 28. Metz, I.C., Ellerbroek, J., Mühlhausen, T., Kügler, D., Hoekstra, 
J.M.: The bird strike challenge. Aerospace 7(3), 26 (2020)
 29. Peinecke, N., Schalk, L.M.: “Detect and avoid for unmanned air-
craft in very low level airspace,” in Automated Low-Altitude Air 
Delivery, pp. 333–351. Springer, Cham (2022)
 30. Filippone, E., Corraro, F., Corraro, G., Ciniglio, U., Shaw, C., Pas-
tor, E., Peinecke, N.: Definition of a remain well clear volume for 
IFR-RPAS integration in airspace classes D-G in Europe. AIAA 
SCITECH 2023 Forum.  https:// doi. org/ 10. 2514/6. 2023- 1590
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.