SOURCE: references/MainPaper/drones-07-00491.pdf
PAGES: 22



===== PAGE 1 / 22 =====
Citation: Zhang, J.; Zhang, H.; Zhou,
J.; Hua, M.; Zhong, G.; Liu, H.
Adaptive Collision Avoidance for
Multiple UAVs in Urban
Environments. Drones 2023, 7, 491.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
drones7080491
Academic Editor: Pablo
Rodríguez-Gonzálvez
Received: 5 July 2023
Revised: 20 July 2023
Accepted: 23 July 2023
Published: 27 July 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
drones
Article
Adaptive Collision Avoidance for Multiple UA Vs in
Urban Environments
Jinpeng Zhang 1,2 , Honghai Zhang 1,2, *, Jinlun Zhou 1,2 , Mingzhuang Hua 2,3 , Gang Zhong 1,2
 and Hao Liu 2,4
1 College of Civil Aviation, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China;
zjp0401@nuaa.edu.cn (J.Z.); jinlunzhou@nuaa.edu.cn (J.Z.); zg1991@nuaa.edu.cn (G.Z.)
2 National Key Laboratory of Air Trafﬁc Flow Management, Nanjing University of Aeronautics
and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China; huamingzhuang@nuaa.edu.cn (M.H.); hliu@nuaa.edu.cn (H.L.)
3 College of General Aviation and Flight, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Liyang 213300, China
4 College of Science, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China
* Correspondence: honghaizhang@nuaa.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-13914766151
Abstract: The increasing number of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in low-altitude airspace is
seriously threatening the safety of the urban environment. This paper proposes an adaptive collision
avoidance method for multiple UAVs (mUAVs), aiming to provide a safe guidance for UAVs at
risk of collision. The proposed method is formulated as a two −layer resolution framework with
the considerations of speed adjustment and rerouting strategies. The ﬁrst layer is established as
a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) model with a continuous state space and action space that
adaptively selects the most suitable resolution strategy for UAV pairs. The second layer is developed
as a collaborative mUAV collision avoidance model, which combines a three-dimensional conﬂict
detection and conﬂict resolution pool to perform resolution. To train the DRL model, in this paper, a
deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm is introduced and improved upon. The results
demonstrate that the average time required to calculate a strategy is 0.096 s, the success rate reaches
95.03%, and the extra ﬂight distance is 26.8 m, which meets the real-time requirements and provides
a reliable reference for human intervention. The proposed method can adapt to various scenarios,
e.g., different numbers and positions of UAVs, with interference from random factors. The improved
DDPG algorithm can also signiﬁcantly improve convergence speed and save training time.
Keywords: urban air trafﬁc management; collision risk; adaptive collision avoidance; deep
reinforcement learning; multiple unmanned aerial vehicles
1. Introduction
Urban low-altitude airspace is an important natural resource that possesses great socio-
economic value, and rational management of urban airspace is of great signiﬁcance in alle-
viating trafﬁc congestion and reducing the rate of ground trafﬁc accidents [1,2]. As the main
subjects of urban air trafﬁc, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have attracted widespread
attention due to their ﬂexibility, convenience, and low cost. By the end of 2022, China
had 700,000 registered UAV owners, 15,130 companies operating UAVs,958,000 registered
UAVs, and about 57,000 h of average daily ﬂight [ 3]. It can be foreseen that with the
development of urban air trafﬁc, the types of tasks performed by UAVs will inevitably tend
to diversify, showing great promise in ﬁelds such as tourism, rescue, and logistics, and with
this comes an increase in urban air trafﬁc ﬂow and the complication of ﬂight situations.
As the number and size of UAVs increases, their operation in urban airspace will
present additional security threats. The dense distribution of buildings, the complex
structure of the airspace, and the high density of aircraft make it extremely easy for
accidents such as dangerous approaches or even collisions to occur. Therefore, in the face
of limited airspace resources, means of effectively avoiding risk of collision have become a
Drones 2023, 7, 491. https://doi.org/10.3390/drones7080491 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/drones

===== PAGE 2 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 2 of 22
primary issue that needs to be addressed in order to build urban air trafﬁc demonstration
areas and develop the low-altitude economy. However, the traditional collision avoidance
algorithms lack sufﬁcient success rates, and do not satisfy the safety interval criteria and
real-time requirements in multi-target and high-density urban scenarios. In addition, these
methods generate collision avoidance trajectories based on discrete state space, and the
selectable actions are also discrete, and are not able to adequately reﬂect the ﬂexibility
of UAVs.
To address these problems, we propose an innovative two−layer resolution framework
for mUAVs based on DRL, which can adaptively provide avoidance strategies for UAVs
based on continue action space and ensure that each UAV has decision-making capability,
thus signiﬁcantly improving the success rate and computational efﬁciency.
1.1. Related Prior Work
Many studies have been performed proposing methods for UAV collision avoidance.
In general, existing methods can be grouped into the following three categories: heuristic
optimization methods, optimal control theory methods, and artiﬁcial intelligence methods.
(1) Heuristic optimization methods
Heuristic optimization methods divide the conﬂict process into a series of discrete
state spaces and then perform an optimal search for approximate solutions in a certain coop-
erative manner [4], and primarily include the swarm intelligence optimization method [5]
A*, D*. Zeng et al. combined the ant colony algorithms and the A* algorithm to solve the
unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) scheduling planning problem, avoiding conﬂicts during
simultaneous path planning for UGVs at a lower cost [6]. Zhao et al. considered collision
probability and the intention information of intruders, using the A* algorithm to optimize
trajectory planning to avoid collision risks [ 7]. Yun et al. applied the enhanced D* lite
algorithm in the ﬁeld of robot path navigation in unknown dynamic environments [8]. Fur-
thermore, these methods are usually combined with other algorithms to solve the conﬂict
problem, such as clustering methods [9] and Legendre Pseudo spectral Method [10].
(2) Optimal control theory methods
The optimal control theory methods select the permissible control rate according to
the kinematic model or the time domain mathematical model so that the UAV operates
according to the constraints and thus achieves collision avoidance. These methods mainly
include three aspects of mixed-integer linear programming, nonlinear optimization, and
dynamic programming. Radmanesh et al. proposed fast-dynamic Mixed Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) for the path planning of UAVs in various ﬂight formations, focusing
on avoiding typical UAVs from colliding with any intruder aircraft [ 11]. De Waen et al.
targeted complex scenarios with multiple obstacles, and divided the MILP problem into
many smaller MILP subproblems for trajectory modeling, which ensures the scalability of
MILP to solve conﬂict problems [12]. Alonso-Ayuso et al. developed an exact mixed-integer
nonlinear optimization model based on geometric construction for tackling the aircraft
conﬂict detection and resolution problem [13].
Heuristic-based search methods are reliable and effective for achieving collision avoid-
ance and are able to resolve conﬂicts among small numbers of UAVs, which is the most
common case in practice today. However, this method is not very suitable for mUAV
conﬂicts, especially when the airspace is crowded, in which case the collision avoidance
paths generated may suffer from secondary conﬂict problems. The optimal control methods
take the minimum interval between UAVs as the optimization condition, and its relatively
complex theory will lead to a decrease in anti-interference capability and an increase in
computation, so it is not able to meet the real-time requirements.
(3) Artiﬁcial intelligence methods
The widespread use of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in recent years has provided new
ideas and implementation paths. Reinforcement learning (RL) is the study of how an
agent can interact with the environment to learn a policy that maximizes the expected

===== PAGE 3 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 3 of 22
cumulative reward for a task. When RL is combined with the powerful understanding
ability of deep learning, it is clear that it possesses better decision-making efﬁciency than
humans in a nearly inﬁnite state space [14,15]. The application of DPL to the ﬁeld of UAV
collision avoidance can solve the problems presented by the methods described above,
while achieving better avoidance in urban airspace with variable environmental states and
meeting strict real-time requirements.
The authors of [16,17] developed a Q-learning algorithm to design the dynamic move-
ment of UAVs, but there is no assurance that it can handle high-dimensional input data.
Singla et al. proposed a deep recurrent Q-network with temporal attention to realize the
indoor autonomous ﬂight of a UAV [ 18]. In [ 19], the DDQN algorithm was applied to
ship navigation to achieve multi-ship collision avoidance in crowded waters. Li et al.
designed a tactical conﬂict resolution method for air logistics transportation based on the
D3QN algorithm, enabling UAVs to successfully avoid non-cooperative targets [20]. The
value-based algorithms (e.g., D3QN and DDQN) can adapt to complex state spaces, but
cannot provide satisfactory solutions for continuous control problems. The emergence
of police-based RL has solved such problems; one of the most widely used and mature
approaches in practice is the DDPG algorithm proposed by DeepMind [21]. For example,
references [22–25] addressed the trajectory optimization in a two UAV scenario based on
the DDPG algorithm. Ribeiro et al. [ 22] utilized a geometric approach to model conﬂict
detection between two UAVs and trained the agent in conjunction with the DDPG algo-
rithm to generate a resolution strategy. The authors of [23,24] utilized the DDPG algorithm
to solve the UAV path following problem, taking into account the conﬂict risks during
movement. In [25], a proper heading angle was obtained using the DDPG algorithm before
the aircraft reached the boundary of the sector to avoid collisions. Alternatively, Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) methods can be used in aircraft collision avoidance, and have
shown a certain level of performance [26].
In summary, although a variety of UAV collision avoidance methods have been devel-
oped based on DRL, there are still several gaps in terms of actual application: (1) Scholars
have typically rasterized the entire airspace when designing the state space [ 16,17,22],
which has some speciﬁc limitations: UAVs can only move to an adjacent raster, which
limits the action dimensions of UAVs, and is not able to adequately reﬂect their ﬂexibility.
The use of a discrete state space would cause a waste of airspace resources, and the whole
raster area may become a no-ﬂy zone due to some small buildings, thus reducing the space
available for UAV ﬂights. (2) The dimensional advantage is also an important factor in
measuring the performance of the method, with most existing UAV collision avoidance
methods borrowing from ground trafﬁc, and thus the dimensional range is limited to 2D,
which does not match the actual operation situation in the airspace, while also limiting
the UAV avoidance actions that can be selected [ 18,20,26]. (3) When the DRL theory is
applied to mUAV collision avoidance, in the existing literature, only one UAV is regarded
as the agent, and the other UAVs are regarded as dynamic obstacles without resolution
ability [20]; their tracks are previously planned. In actual operation, conﬂicts may arise
from any UAV , so each UAV should have the ability to make their own decisions.
1.2. Our Contributions
To solve the above problems, in this paper, a more practical collision avoidance method
for mUAVs is developed. The primary contributions of this study are the following:
(1) In this paper, an adaptive decision-making framework for mUAV collision avoidance
is proposed. The adaptive framework enables UAVs to autonomously determine the
avoidance action to be taken in 3D space, providing the UAVs with more options for
extrication strategies when faced with static or dynamic obstacles. This framework
combines the conﬂict resolution pool in order to transform mUAV conﬂicts into UAV
pairs for avoidance, controlling the computational complexity at the polynomial level,
thereby providing a new idea for mUAV collision avoidance.

===== PAGE 4 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 4 of 22
(2) A DRL model for UAV pairs is designed based on a continuous action space and state
space, reﬂecting the maneuverability of UAVs and avoiding wastage of urban airspace
resources. The model endows each UAV with decision-making ability, and utilizes a
ﬁxed sector format to explore conﬂicting obstacles, thus simplifying the state of the
agent and making it more adaptable to dense urban building environments.
(3) The DDPG algorithm is introduced to train the agent, and its convergence speed is
enhanced by proposing the mechanism of destination area dynamic adjustment.
A summary of surveys related to DRL methods in the ﬁeld of UAV collision avoidance
is provided in Table 1. The table shows that this research represents the ﬁrst study to
resolve mUAV conﬂicts in a 3D environment based on continuous state and action space.
Table 1. Related work on conﬂict resolution based on DRL.
Ref. Methods Type State and Action Space Action Multi-UA V Environment
[16] Q-leaning Value-based Discrete/Discrete choosing from
4 possible directions NO 2D
[17] Q-leaning Value-based Discrete/Discrete choosing from
7 possible directions YES 3D
[18] DDQN Value-based Continuous/Discrete choosing from
3 possible directions NO 2D
[20] D3QN Value-based Continuous/Discrete choosing acceleration;
choosing yaw angular velocity YES 2D
[22] DDPG police-based Discrete/Continuous
choosing heading
angle(max:15◦/s); choosing
acceleration (1.0 kts/s)
NO 2D
[23] DDPG police-based Continuous/Continuous choosing altitude,
heading angle NO 3D
[24] DDPG police-based Continuous/Continuous choosing heading angle
(−30◦, 30◦) NO 2D
[26] PPO police-based Continuous/Continuous
choosing heading angle
(−30◦, 30◦),and speed
[0 m/s, 40 m/s]
NO 2D
This
paper
Improved
DDPG police-based Continuous/Continuous choosing velocity, heading
angle, and altitude YES 3D
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the two−layer resolution
framework is presented, and the methods for collision avoidance of UAV pairs and mUAVs
are proposed. In Section 3, the improved DDPG algorithm is proposed for training the
agent. In Section 4, the validity of the method is veriﬁed using a designed city scenario. In
Section 5, some conclusions and summaries are presented. The table in the abbreviations
section shows the main symbols used in this paper.
2. Problem Formulation
In this section, we propose a two−layer resolution framework (Figure 1) and divide
the problem formulation of mUAV collision avoidance into two parts: collision avoidance
between UAV pairs, and collaborative mUAV collision avoidance. Firstly, the collision
avoidance agent training model is designed based on DPL, and the agent can assign avoid-
ance actions for UAV pairs in real time and complete collision avoidance for both dynamic
obstacles (between UAVs) and static obstacles (buildings). Secondly, the collaborative
mUAV collision avoidance model is proposed, in which mUAV conﬂicts are transformed
into the form of UAV pairs and then the agent is used to deconﬂict them one by one.
The collision zero model of the UAV and building are generated as described in an ex-
isting study [27], and are elliptical and cylindrical shapes, as shown inEquations (1) and (2).
Du =
{
r ∈ R3 : rT Ar ≤ 1, A−1 = diag
(
au2, bu2, hu2
)}
(1)
Do =
{
(x, y, z) ∈ R3 : x2 + y2 ≤ Ro2, z ≤ ho
}
(2)

===== PAGE 5 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 5 of 22
where au, bu, hu are the semi-axes of the ellipsoid, respectively, and Ro, ho are the radius
and height of the cylinder.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5  of  22 
 
mUAV collision avoidance model is proposed, in which mUAV conﬂicts are transformed 
into the form of UA V pairs and then the agent is used to deconﬂict them one by one.  
        Current moment UAV flight status:     {u 1,u2,u3, ... ,un}
   Conflict risk detection:  
UAS vs UAS UAS vs Building
Conflict resolution pool
 
 
UAS1 vs UAS2
UAS2 vs UAS3
. . .
 
 
 
UAS4
UAS5
UAS6
...
Priority: σ1 
UAS2 and UAS3
Priority: σ2 
UAS1 and UAS2
Priority: σ3 
UAS4 and UAS5
Priority: σ4 
UAS5 and UAS6
...
Act ion of 
UASi
Turn right or turn left
 Action of 
UASj
      Climb or descend Acceleration 
Turn right or turn left Climb or descend   Acceleration 
  St ra te gy for e lem ent 1  St ra te gy for  e lem ent 2  St ra te gy for  e lem ent 3  St ra te gy for  e lem ent 4
velocity vector
...
The UAS execute avoidance strategies, airspace status shifts
distance decision
       
Environmental receiver
...
(; )s 
DDPG
 heading angle: 
         [-3°,3°]
Action
 altitude adjust: 
         [-1,1]
  speed adjust:
         [-3,3]
 flight state vector
 interaction vector
    building vector
State
Agent
       
Reward 
 destin atio n int ent  building collision 
UAS collision  additional reward
Status on conflict 
UAS pai r
Action1
Action2
status updates
The first layer
The second layer
 
Figure 1. Overall workﬂow of the two−layer resolution framework. 
The collision zero model of the UA V and building are generated as described in an 
existing study  [27], and are  elliptical and  cylindrical shapes, as  shown in Equations (1) 
and (2). 
 
31 2 2 2:1 , , ,T
uu u uDr R r A rAd i a g a b h      (1) 
 
32 2 2(, ,) : , oooDx y z R x y R z h      (2) 
where au, bu, hu are the semi‐axes of the ellipsoid, respectively, and Ro, ho are the radius and 
height of the cylinder. 
2.1. First Layer: DRL‐Based Method for Collision Avoidance between UA Vs in a UA V Pair 
In this section, the ﬁrst layer of the framework is designed, and the agent training 
model is constructed with respect to three aspects: state space, action space, and reward 
function. 
2.1.1. Continuous State Space 
According to the explanation in the previous section, we replace the rasterized space 
with a continuous state space. The agent state vector includes the following three parts: 
(1) The ﬂight state vector of the UAV, including six attributes (φ: heading angle; V: hori‐
zontal speed; Z: the altitude of UA V; φg: relative heading angle of the destination to 
Figure 1. Overall workﬂow of the two−layer resolution framework.
2.1. First Layer: DRL-Based Method for Collision Avoidance between UAVs in a UAV Pair
In this section, the ﬁrst layer of the framework is designed, and the agent train-
ing model is constructed with respect to three aspects: state space, action space, and
reward function.
2.1.1. Continuous State Space
According to the explanation in the previous section, we replace the rasterized space
with a continuous state space. The agent state vector includes the following three parts:
(1) The ﬂight state vector of the UAV , including six attributes ( ϕ: heading angle;
V: horizontal speed; Z: the altitude of UAV; ϕg: relative heading angle of the desti-
nation to UAV; dg: the horizontal distance of the destination to UAV), as shown in
Figure 2. These attributes are able to accurately reﬂect the current ﬂight status of the
UAV , and the agent guides the UAV to its destination based on the ﬂight status vector.
(2) Interaction vectors between UAV pairs (ϕus: the difference in heading angle; Zus: the
difference in altitude;dus: the horizontal distance between two UAVs). These attributes

===== PAGE 6 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 6 of 22
reﬂect the position and heading relationships between the UAVs in a UAV pair, and the
agent avoids collision between UAVs in a UAV pair based on the interaction vectors.
(3) Building vectors. There are lots of buildings in the urban airspace, and if all building
information is put into the agent, this will result in high state vector dimensionality
and affect the speed of convergence. In this paper, considering the detection range of
the UAV in the horizontal direction, a ﬂight sector is used to map obstacles affecting
ﬂight into a ﬁxed-length vector, and these are regarded as the obstacle vectors, as
shown in Figure 2.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6  of  22 
 
UAV; dg:  the horizontal distance  of  the destination to  UA V), as shown  in  Figure 2. 
These attributes are able to accurately reﬂect the current ﬂight status of the UAV, and 
the agent guides the UA V to its destination based on the ﬂight status vector. 
(2) Interaction vectors between UA V pairs (φus: the diﬀerence in heading angle; Zus: the 
diﬀerence in altitude; dus: the horizontal distance between two UA Vs). These attrib‐
utes reﬂect the position and heading relationships between the UA Vs in a UA V pair, 
and the agent avoids collision between UA Vs in a UA V pair based on the interaction 
vectors. 
(3) Building vectors. There are lots of buildings in the urban airspace, and if all building 
information is put into the agent, this will result in high state vector dimensionality 
and aﬀect the speed of convergence. In this paper, considering the detection range of 
the UA V in the horizontal direction, a ﬂight sector is used to map obstacles aﬀecting 
ﬂight  into  a  ﬁxed‐length  vector,  and  these  are  regarded  as  the  obstacle  vectors,  as 
shown in Figure 2. 
X
1

2
8
2d
2d
1d detd
2
2iodd 
1
1iodd  12 tio dedd 
1g
tZ
1
tV
1
t
1
t
g
1
t
gd
Y
Z
1
tZ
t
usZ
2
tV
us
t
t
usd

7
 
(a)  (b) 
Figure 2. The diagram of the agent state vector. (a) Flight state vector. (b) Obstacle vectors. 
The detection area is supposed to be a circle with the location as the center and the 
detection distance as the radius, that is, the agent can obtain the position information of 
obstacles  in  this  area.  Starting  from  the  heading  angle  and  rotating  counterclockwise, 
every 45° is divided into one sector, and a total of eight sectors can be obtained. The dis‐
tance between the UA V and all obstacles in each sector is calculated, and the closest dis‐
tance is one of the attributes; if there are no obstacles in the sector, the value of this attrib‐
ute corresponds to the detection distance. Supposing that there are j obstacles in sector m, 
then: 
  

12
,, , , ,  
,, ,
jj j j t t t j
iom iom iom iom i i i u o det
j
iom iom iom iom
dm i n x y z x y zR R d
dm i n d d d
  
 
  (3) 
where Ru denotes the collision zone radius of the UA V,  𝑅௢
௝  denotes the collision zone ra‐
dius of building j, ddet denotes the UA V detection distance,  𝑑௜௢௠
௝    denotes the distance at‐
tribute between UA V and building j, diom denotes the distance attribute of sector m, so the 
obstacle vector of UA V is: [dio1, dio2, …, dio8]. 
In summary, the state vector received by the agent from the environment at moment 
t is: 
11 1 2 2 11 1 1 1 1 8 2 1 2 8
Inf teraction   State  St of UAS of UAS1 and UAS2  of  UAS1 o U AtS 2ae
, , , , , , ,..., , , , , ,..., , ,...,
g
Obstacles
tttt t t t t t t t t t t t
t g g g us us us o o o oSV Z Z d dZ d d d d d  

 

      , tSS   (4) 
Figure 2. The diagram of the agent state vector. (a) Flight state vector. (b) Obstacle vectors.
The detection area is supposed to be a circle with the location as the center and the
detection distance as the radius, that is, the agent can obtain the position information of
obstacles in this area. Starting from the heading angle and rotating counterclockwise, every
45◦ is divided into one sector, and a total of eight sectors can be obtained. The distance
between the UAV and all obstacles in each sector is calculated, and the closest distance
is one of the attributes; if there are no obstacles in the sector, the value of this attribute
corresponds to the detection distance. Supposing that there are j obstacles in sector m, then:
dj
iom = min
(
(
xj
iom, yj
iom, zj
iom
)
−
(
xt
i, yt
i, zt
i
) − Ru − Rj
o, ddet
)
diom = min
(
d1
iom, d2
iom, · · · , dj
iom
) (3)
where Ru denotes the collision zone radius of the UAV ,Rj
o denotes the collision zone radius
of building j, ddet denotes the UAV detection distance, dj
iom denotes the distance attribute
between UAV and building j, diom denotes the distance attribute of sector m, so the obstacle
vector of UAV is: [dio1, dio2, . . ., dio8].
In summary, the state vector received by the agent from the environment at moment
t is:
St =

ϕt
1, Vt
1 , Zt
1, ϕt
g1, Zt
g1, dt
g1
  
State of UAS1
, ϕt
2, . . . ,dt
g2
  
State of UAS2
, ϕt
us, Zt
us, dt
us  
Interaction of UAS
, dt
1o1, . . . ,dt
1o8, dt
2o1, . . . ,dt
2o8  
Obstacles of UAS1 and UAS2

, St ∈ S (4)
2.1.2. Continuous Action Space
When modeling the UAV action space based on deep reinforcement learning, the
control of the UAV is usually achieved based on adjusting spatial position, velocity, or
acceleration. For the continuous state space and the ﬂexibility of UAVs, in this paper, the
continuous action space is designed based on adjusting the velocity and the maneuver-
ing methods of UAVs are simpliﬁed, and are summarized into three processes: heading

===== PAGE 7 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 7 of 22
adjustment, altitude adjustment, and speed adjustment (∆ϕ: alteration in heading angle;
∆Z: alteration in altitude; ∆V: alteration in horizontal speed), where at each time step,
∆ϕ ∈ [−3◦, 3◦], ∆Z ∈ [−1 m, 1 m],∆V ∈ [−2 m/s, 2 m/s]. Thus, the action space of the
agent at moment t is:
At =

∆ϕ1, ∆Z1, ∆V1  
Action of UAS1
, ∆ϕ2, ∆Z2, ∆V2  
Action of UAS2

, At ∈ A (5)
2.1.3. Reward Function Design
The reward is a scalar feedback signal given by the environment that shows how well
an agent performs at performing a certain strategy at a certain step. The reward function is
a key component of the DRL framework. The purpose of the agent interacting with the
environment is to maximize its reward value, so designing a suitable reward function for
the agent can improve training performance and lead to faster convergence.
In this paper, we consider the shortest path to the destination, avoid collision between
UAV pair, avoid collision between UAV and building, avoid the UAV ﬂying out of the
speciﬁc area, set four reward functions, and use artiﬁcially designed “dense” rewards to
achieve a dynamic balance between near-term and long-term rewards, which can mitigate
the sparse reward problem in DRL.
(1) Destination intent reward: when there are no obstacles in the sector of the UAV pair,
the destination intent reward is used to ensure that the UAV takes the shortest path to
the destination. The entire movement of the UAV is divided into multiple “intensive”
actions, and the reward function is set for them to ensure that each action of the UAV
affects the ﬁnal reward value, thus contributing to the improvement of the overall
strategy, as shown in Equation (6):
ri
1 =



0.5 ϕt
gi ∈ [0◦, 10◦] or ϕt
gi ∈ [350◦, 360◦]
0.1 ϕt
gi ∈ (10◦, 20◦] or ϕt
gi ∈ [340◦, 350◦)
0 ϕt
gi ∈ (20◦, 90◦] or ϕt
gi ∈ [270◦, 340◦)
−0.1 else
ri
2 =
(
dt−1
gi − dt
gi
)
+
(
Zt−1
gi − Zt
gi
)
Ri
d = ri
1 + ri
2
(6)
(2) Building collision avoidance reward: when there are obstacles in the sector of the UAV
pair, it is necessary to ensure that the UAVs avoid colliding with buildings while ﬂying
to their destinations; therefore, we need to balance the two tasks, and the reward
function at this time is shown in Equation (7).
ri
1 =



0.5 ϕt
gi ∈ [0◦, 10◦] or ϕt
gi ∈ [350◦, 360◦]
0.1 ϕt
gi ∈ (10◦, 20◦] or ϕt
gi ∈ [340◦, 350◦)
0 else
ri
2 =
(
dt−1
gi − dt
gi
)
+
(
Zt−1
gi − Zt
gi
)
ri
3 =
(
dt
iom − dt−1
iom
)
+
(
dt
iom/ddet − 1
)
Ri
d = ri
1 + ri
2 + ri
3
(7)
(3) UAV collision avoidance reward: the UAV collision avoidance reward is used to avoid
collisions between the UAV and other UAVs. A UAV alert area is set up, and UAV

===== PAGE 8 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 8 of 22
collision avoidance is made the main task when there are other UAVs within the alert
area, as shown in Equation (8).
rij
1 =



−0.1 ·


→
Vt
i ·
→
Vt
j⏐⏐⏐⏐
→
Vt
i
⏐⏐⏐⏐·
⏐⏐⏐⏐
→
Vt
j
⏐⏐⏐⏐

−1 dt
us < ddet and Z t
us < 4 · Hu  
Alerting Zone
0 else
rij
2 =
{(
dt
us − dt−1
us
)
+
(
Zt
us − Zt−1
us
)
+
( dtus
ddet
+ Ztus
4·Hu − 2
)
Alerting
0 else
Rij
uu = rij
1 + rij
2
(8)
where
→
Vt
i is the direction vector of the velocity of the UAV at momentt.
(4) Additional reward: There are four ﬁnal states of the UAV: reaching the destination,
ﬂying out of the control area, colliding with obstacles, and colliding with other drones.
This additional reward is used to provide a relatively large reward or penalty value
when the UAV reaches its ﬁnal state, which can be used to guide the UAV to its
destination and avoid bad events such as collisions or loss of control, as shown in
Equation (9).
Ri
ex =



12 : Ui
des ∈ Di
u
−6 : Drive out of control area
−6 : Dj
o ∩ Di
u ̸= ∅
−6 : Dj
u ∩ Di
u ̸= ∅
(9)
In summary, the reward function received by the agent per unit of time is as follows:
Rt = Ri
d + Rij
uu + Ri
ex ∀i, j ∈ {1, 2} (10)
2.1.4. The Interaction between the Agent and the Environment
In reinforcement learning, the interaction between the agent and its environment is
often modeled by a Markovian decision process. This process can be represented by a
four-tuple (S, A, R, γ), where S is the current state of the agent Equation (4), A is the action
taken by the agent (Equation (5)), R is the reward value obtained by the agent after taking
the current action, γ ∈ [0, 1] is a discount factor, which is a constant, as shown in Figure 3.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8  of  22 
 
(3) UAV  collision  avoidance  reward:  the  UAV  collision  avoidance  reward  is  used  to 
avoid collisions between the UA V and other UA Vs. A UA V alert area is set up, and 
UAV collision avoidance is made the main task when there are other UA Vs within 
the alert area, as shown in Equation (8). 
  
1
11
2
0.1 -1        4
0                                  
+2 4
tt
ij tt
us det us uij tt
ij
tt
tt t t us us
us us us usij
d
nr
e
Ale i
tu
tn g  Z o e
VV d< d a n d Z Hr VV
else
dZdd ZZr dH

        

     
   
      
12
   
0                                                                           
ij ij ij
uu
Alerting
else
Rr r

 


 
(8) 
where  t
iV
 
  is the direction vector of the velocity of the UAV at moment t. 
(4) Additional reward: There are four ﬁnal states of the UAV: reaching the destination, 
ﬂying  out  of  the  control  area,  colliding  with  obstacles,  and  colliding  with  other 
drones. This additional reward is used to provide a relatively large reward or penalty 
value when the UA V reaches its ﬁnal state, which can be used to guide the UAV to 
its destination and avoid bad events such as collisions or loss of control, as shown in 
Equation (9). 
12   :  
6 :  Drive out of control area
6: 
6: 
ii
des u
i
ex ji
ou
ji
uu
UD
R
DD
DD
 

   
  
  (9) 
In summary, the reward function received by the agent per unit of time is as follows: 
    , 1, 2ii j i
td u u e xRRR R i j      (10) 
2.1.4. The Interaction between the Agent and the Environment 
In reinforcement learning, the interaction between the agent and its environment is 
often  modeled  by  a  Markovian  decision  process.  This  process  can  be  represented  by  a 
four‐tuple  ሺ𝑆, 𝐴, 𝑅, 𝛾ሻ, where S is the current state of the agent (Equation (4)), A is the ac‐
tion taken by the agent (Equation (5)), R is the reward value obtained by the agent after 
taking the current action,  𝛾∈ሾ0,1ሿ  is a discount factor, which is a constant, as shown in 
Figure 3. 
Agent Environment
UAS1 UAS2
   Markov trajectory:  S0   A0   R0   S1   A1   R1   S2   A2   R2     S3   A3   R3       ...
St
St+1
A1,t A2,tA1,t+1 A2,t+1
AtAt+1
Rt
Rt+1
   Training data:         ...Data1 Data2 Data3  
Figure 3. The interaction mode between the agent and the environment. 
Assuming  a  discrete  time  domain  𝑡∈ ሼ0, 1, 2,⋯ ሽ ,  the  agent  starts  from  the  initial 
state S0 and observes the environment state  𝑆௧∈𝑆   at a certain time node t, taking action 
Figure 3. The interaction mode between the agent and the environment.
Assuming a discrete time domain t ∈ {0, 1, 2, · · ·}, the agent starts from the initial
state S0 and observes the environment state St ∈ S at a certain time node t, taking action
At ∈ A based on the state and speciﬁc decision-making policy, and the next state is
transferred to St+1, while the agent receives an immediate reward Rt = R(St, At). All
the variables obtained from the Markov decision process can be recorded as a trajectory

===== PAGE 9 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 9 of 22
τ = (S0, A0, R0, S1, A1, R1, · · ·), and each segment of the trajectory can be intercepted to
form a set of training data for the subsequent training of the Target-network and Evaluate-
network in the algorithm.
2.2. Second Layer: Collaborative Collision Avoidance for mUAVs
2.2.1. Three-Dimensional Conﬂict Detection
To ensure mUAV safety, the conﬂict risk of each UAV needs to be detected, and then
targeted for resolution. The conﬂict risk is detected based on the velocity vector and
distance; the risk includes two types: UAV vs. UAV and UAV vs. building.
For conﬂict detection between the UAVs in a UAV pair, subscriptsS and R designate
the stochastic UAV and the reference UAV , respectively, in any UAV pair, PR denotes
the position of the reference UAV ,PS denotes the position of the stochastic UAV , and the
velocities of the reference UAV and the stochastic UAV at the current moment areVR, VS.
In the process of modeling, deﬁning a combined collision zone, which is assigned to
the reference UAV so that the stochastic UAV can be regarded as a particle. The parameters
of combined collision region D are:
HD = 2Hu = 2
√
3hu RD = 2Ru = 2
√
3au (11)
A 3D collision coordinate system is established with the origin ﬁxed at the position of
the reference UAV; the relative position and velocity of the UAV pair are:∆Puu = PS − PR,
∆Vuu = VS − VR. It is assumed that ∆l is the extension of the relative velocity ∆Vuu, and if
the intersection of ∆l and the combined collision region D is non-empty, i.e., ∆l ∩ D ̸= ∅,
then the UAV pair meets the condition of conﬂict in the relative velocity dimension; then,
the spatial distance of the UAV pair is calculated, and if the spatial distance is less than the
threshold while satisfying the relative velocity conﬂict condition, it can be determined that
there is a collision risk for this UAV pair.
For conﬂict detection between UAVs and buildings, the combined collision zone is
also deﬁned. Since buildings are ﬁxed, it is only necessary to consider whether the velocity
extension line of the UAV intersects the combined collision region, and then the spatial
distance between the UAV and building is considered to determine the conﬂict, as shown
in Figure 4.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9  of  22 
 
𝐴௧∈  A based on the state and speciﬁc decision‐making policy, and the next state is trans‐
ferred to  𝑆௧ାଵ, while the agent receives an immediate reward  𝑅௧ൌ𝑅ሺ𝑆௧, 𝐴௧ሻ. All the vari‐
ables  obtained  from  the  Markov  decision  process  can  be  recorded  as  a  trajectory  𝜏ൌ
ሺ𝑆଴, 𝐴଴, 𝑅଴, 𝑆ଵ, 𝐴ଵ, 𝑅ଵ, ⋯ ሻ, and each segment of the trajectory can be intercepted to form a 
set of training data for the subsequent training of the Target‐network and Evaluate‐net‐
work in the algorithm. 
2.2. Second Layer: Collaborative Collision Avoidance for mUAVs 
2.2.1. Three‐Dimensional Conﬂict Detection 
To ensure mUAV safety, the conﬂict risk of each UA V needs to be detected, and then 
targeted for resolution. The conﬂict risk is detected based on the velocity vector and dis‐
tance; the risk includes two types: UA V vs. UA V and UA V vs. building. 
For conﬂict detection between the UA Vs in a UA V pair, subscripts S and R designate 
the stochastic UA V and the reference UA V, respectively, in any UA V pair, PR denotes the 
position of the reference UAV, PS denotes the position of the stochastic UAV, and the ve‐
locities of the reference UA V and the stochastic UA V at the current moment are VR, VS. 
In the process of modeling, deﬁning a combined collision zone, which is assigned to 
the reference UA V so that the stochastic UAV can be regarded as a particle. The parame‐
ters of combined collision region D are: 
22 3 2 2 3Du u D u uH Hh R Ra     (11) 
A 3D collision coordinate system is established with the origin ﬁxed at the position 
of the reference UAV; the relative position and velocity of the UA V pair are:  ∆𝑃௨௨ൌ𝑃ௌെ
𝑃ோ,  ∆𝑉௨௨ൌ𝑉ௌെ𝑉ோ. It is assumed that  ∆𝑙  is the extension of the relative velocity  ∆𝑉௨௨, and 
if the intersection of  ∆𝑙  and the combined collision region D is non‐empty, i.e.,  ∆𝑙 ∩ 𝐷 ്
∅, then the UA V pair meets the condition of conﬂict in the relative velocity dimension; 
then, the spatial distance of the UA V pair is calculated, and if the spatial distance is less 
than the threshold while satisfying the relative velocity conﬂict condition, it can be deter‐
mined that there is a collision risk for this UA V pair. 
For conﬂict detection between UA Vs and buildings, the combined collision zone is 
also deﬁned. Since buildings are ﬁxed, it is only necessary to consider whether the velocity 
extension line of the UA V intersects the combined collision region, and then the spatial 
distance between the UA V and building is considered to determine the conﬂict, as shown 
in Figure 4. 
Random UAV
Reference UAV
Δl
1dd
Potential risk 
area
ΔVuu
Combined 
collision zone 
Combined 
collision zone 
Ru
Hu
Potential risk 
area Random UAV
1dd
VR
UAV vs. UAV UAV vs. Building
Building
 
Figure 4. The diagram of three‐dimensional conﬂict detection. 
2.2.2. Conﬂict Resolution Pool 
Based on the UA V conﬂict detection method in the previous section, we propose the 
concept of a conﬂict resolution pool, where the UAVs detected as being at risk are stored 
as the objects of the collision avoidance agent. For UA V‐to‐UA V conﬂicts, the elements in 
Figure 4. The diagram of three-dimensional conﬂict detection.
2.2.2. Conﬂict Resolution Pool
Based on the UAV conﬂict detection method in the previous section, we propose the
concept of a conﬂict resolution pool, where the UAVs detected as being at risk are stored
as the objects of the collision avoidance agent. For UAV-to-UAV conﬂicts, the elements in
the pool are UAV pairs, and for UAV-to-building conﬂicts, the elements are single UAVs,
while the distances of UAVs at risk are deposited in the pool as the priorities of conﬂict

===== PAGE 10 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 10 of 22
resolution, with smaller distances indicating higher levels of risk and a more urgent need
for collision avoidance, as shown in Equation (12).
P =



(u1, u2) : σ12  
Setelements
, · · · ,
(
ui, uj
)
: σij
  
Con f lict drone pairs
, u3 : σ3, · · · , ul : σl  
Conﬂict with buildings



σij = 1
dij
, σl = 1
dl
(12)
where (ui, uj) is the conﬂict UAV pair,ul is the UAV in conﬂict with the building, σ is the
priority, and d is the spatial distance.
The conﬂict resolution pool transforms mUAV conﬂicts into UAV pairs for avoidance,
which simpliﬁes the cooperative collision avoidance problem to a great extent. If a trajectory
search-based approach is used to calculate the safe path for each UAV individually, the
search space will grow exponentially with the number of UAVs, and when the number
exceeds a certain value, the complexity of the algorithm will be too high to be able to solve
the problem within an acceptable time. The conﬂict resolution pool prevents the resolution
energy being wasted on temporarily safe UAVs, so that the computational complexity of
the method can be controlled at the polynomial level, and the ability to perform collision
avoidance will be further improved.
2.2.3. Collaborative Resolution Process for mUAVs
In this section, we propose a working model for this method by combining the concepts
of the collision avoidance agent, three-dimensional conﬂict detection, and the conﬂict
resolution pool.
Assuming that there are n UAVs in the urban airspace, the speciﬁc steps are as follows:
Step 1: A pool K is built, consisting of all UAVs in the airspace, which is initialized for
each timestamp:
K = {u1, u2, u3, · · · , un} (13)
Step 2: The three-dimensional conﬂict detection method is used to detect UAVs at
risk, which are stored in the conﬂict resolution pool S, and then the priorities of the pool
elements are calculated.
Step 3: The UAV pair with the highest priority is selected, as follows:
(i, j) = argmax
(i,j)
(σij ) (14)
If the UAV pairs are all in the poolK, the reinforcement learning agent is used to assign
avoidance actions to them. For UAVs that are not in K, the actions assigned to it by the
agent are ignored, and the original actions are kepts unchanged. Meanwhile, this UAV pair
is removed from pool S.
Step 4: When there are no UAV pairs in the conﬂict resolution poolS, the two UAVs
with the highest priorities that are in conﬂict with the building are selected and a UAV pair
is formed, as follows:
(m, n) : m = argmax
l
(σl), n = argmax
l′
(σl′ ), m ̸= n (15)
The agent is used to assign avoidance actions to them, and the corresponding UAVs
are removed from conﬂict resolution pool S.
Step 5: The UAVs that have been assigned avoidance actions are removed from
pool K until S = ∅, and for the UAVs that are still in pool K, their original actions are
kept unchanged.
Figure 5 shows the process of collaborative collision avoidance.

===== PAGE 11 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 11 of 22
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11  of  22 
 
Esta blish a wai ting 
resolution set K
Esta blish resolution set  
1
2
3 4
5
6
7
8
7
element  1
5
element  2
element  3
78priority 
56priority 
3
4
Agent distribution avoidance action
Next t ime  period, upda te the set K
element  5element  4
1
1
2
5
1
2
6
8
3
4
9 9
St a t e ( s )
i iV iZ gi giZ gid
us usZ usd
1iod 2iod 3iod 8iod
i=1,2   
Flight  state 
Inter c ation s tate
i=1,2   
O b st ac l e  s t at e 
...
...
...
1 
1Z 
1V
2 
2Z 
2V
Action of 
UAS1
Action of 
UAS2
Agent  
Ful ly -c onn ec te d ne t work Acti on( s)
5 7
6
8
78priority 
 
Figure 5. Diagram of collaborative collision resolution. 
3. Improved Algorithm for Agent Training 
3.1. Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient 
Faced with a continuous state space and action space, in this paper, the DDPG algo‐
rithm is taken to train the collision avoidance agent for the UA V pair. The DDPG algo‐
rithm utilizes four neural networks in the actor‐critic framework: policy network ( (; )s 
),  Q  network  ( (, ; )Qsa   ),  target  policy  network  ( (; )s    ),  and  target  Q  network  (
(, ; )Qsa 
). 
The actor calculates the optimal action for the current state based on the learned pol‐
icy function ( ()is ). The critic estimates the value function ( (, )Qs a ) given the state and 
the action, which provides an expected accumulated future reward for this state–action 
pair. In addition, the critic is responsible for calculating the loss function (i.e., TD error) 
that is used in the learning process for both the policy network and the Q‐network. To 
update the critic network, similar to Q‐learning, the Bellman equation [28] is used: 
11(, (; ) ; )tt t ttarget R Q S S   
   (16) 
Then, the loss function is deﬁned, and the argument is updated to minimize the loss 
between the original Q and the target: 
2
1
1 (( , ; ) )
n
tt t
t
Loss target Q S an 

    (17) 
The actor utilizes the policy network ( (; )s  ) to select the best action, which maxim‐
izes the value function. The objective function in updating the actor is to maximize the 
expected return: 
,( )() ( ( , | ) | )
ttss a sJQ s a
     (18) 
According to the chain rule, the gradient of the objective function Q concerning the 
actor parameters can be obtained: 
() ( ) ( ,) aJ sQ s a      (19) 
Then, for mini‐batch data, the mean of the sum of gradients is taken: 
Figure 5. Diagram of collaborative collision resolution.
3. Improved Algorithm for Agent Training
3.1. Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient
Faced with a continuous state space and action space, in this paper, the DDPG algo-
rithm is taken to train the collision avoidance agent for the UAV pair. The DDPG algorithm
utilizes four neural networks in the actor-critic framework: policy network (π(s; θ)), Q net-
work (Q(s, a; ω)), target policy network (π(s; θ−)), and target Q network (Q(s, a; ω−)).
The actor calculates the optimal action for the current state based on the learned policy
function (πθ(si)). The critic estimates the value function (Qω(s, a)) given the state and the
action, which provides an expected accumulated future reward for this state–action pair. In
addition, the critic is responsible for calculating the loss function (i.e., TD error) that is used
in the learning process for both the policy network and the Q-network. To update the critic
network, similar to Q-learning, the Bellman equation [28] is used:
target t = Rt + γQ(St+1, π(St+1; θ−); ω−) (16)
Then, the loss function is deﬁned, and the argument is updated to minimize the loss
between the original Q and the target:
Loss = 1
n
n
∑
t=1
(target t − Q(St, at; ω))2 (17)
The actor utilizes the policy network ( π(s; θ)) to select the best action, which maxi-
mizes the value function. The objective function in updating the actor is to maximize the
expected return:
J(θ) = E(Q(s, a
⏐⏐⏐ω)
⏐⏐⏐s=st,a=πθ (st)) (18)
According to the chain rule, the gradient of the objective function Q concerning the
actor parameters can be obtained:
∇θ J(θ) ≈ ∇ θπθ(s)∇aQ(s, a) (19)
Then, for mini-batch data, the mean of the sum of gradients is taken:
∇θ J(θ) ≈ 1
n ∑
i
∇θπθ(s)|si∇aQω(s, a)
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
s=si,a=πθ (si)
(20)

===== PAGE 12 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 12 of 22
The target network is a network used in the training phase. This network is equivalent
to the original network being trained, and it provides the target values used to compute the
loss function. In the DDPG algorithm, the target network is modiﬁed using a soft update:
{ θ− ← τθ + (1 − τ)θ−
ω− ← τω + (1 − τ)ω− (21)
This means that the target weights are constrained to change slowly. The use of target
networks with soft updates allows them to give consistent targets during the temporal-
difference backups and causes the learning process to remain stable.
3.2. An Improved Measure for DDPG
The DDPG algorithm has high execution efﬁciency, enabling continuous motion
control of the agent. However, presented with the speciﬁc environment described in this
paper, the DDPG consumes too much time in agent training, making it difﬁcult to respond
quickly when the urban environment undergoes signiﬁcant changes and the agent needs
to be retrained. To address such problems, this section improves the algorithm mainly in
terms of the dynamic adjustment of the destination area.
Due to the large spatial area of the city, the UAV destination is relatively small, and
is replaced by a prime point in Equation (9), where Ui
des ∈ Di
u indicates that the UAV has
reached its destination, and the agent receives the corresponding reward. However, in
the actual training process, it is difﬁcult to achieve the above conditions when the UAV
performs the search, so there is little chance for the agent to obtain a relatively large reward
value, thus causing the convergence speed to decrease.
In this section, the way of obtaining destination rewards in the algorithm is improved
based on the Wright learning curve model, and a dynamic adjustment mechanism for the
destination area is proposed. During the early stage of training, the destination area is
expanded so that the agent can complete the task relatively easily and learn the primary
strategy. According to the learning curve, the destination area is gradually reduced, and
the agent gradually learns more difﬁcult strategies, which is conducive to improving the
stability of the learning and accelerating the convergence speed of the algorithm. The
destination range is deﬁned as being spherical:
Ui
des ∈ Di
des, Di
des =
{
r ∈ R3 : rTr ≤ Ri
des
}
(22)
In Equation (22), Di
des represents the destination area, ifDi
u ∩ Di
des ̸= ∅ means the UAV
has reached its destination, the area radius is adjusted with the training episode according
to the Wright learning curve model:
{
α = lgC
lg2
Ri
des = R · xα
(23)
In Equation (23), α is the learning rate, C is the attenuation coefﬁcient, R is the initial
destination area radius, and x indicates the training episode. The dynamic adjustment
mechanism of the destination area further optimizes the “dense” reward and allows the
algorithm to learn useful experiences in the early stages.
The original DDPG algorithm needs more training epochs to detect the accurate
location due to the small and ﬁxed destination area, and sometimes even fails to obtain
the destination reward. The improved DDPG algorithm adds a dynamic adjustment
mechanism for the destination area, which enlarges the size of the destination area in the
initial stage of training, so that the agent can easily obtain the approximate destination
location, ensuring that it will move in the right direction in the subsequent training. As
the training progresses, the algorithm gradually reduces the destination area based on the
Wright learning curve, guiding the agent to the precise destination location. Compared

===== PAGE 13 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 13 of 22
with the original algorithm, the improved DDPG algorithm is more goal oriented and
avoids ineffective exploration on the part of the agent, so it can accelerate the convergence
speed and save training resources.
4. Results and Discussion
4.1. Environment Setting and Hyperparameters
To analyze the performance of the mUAV collision avoidance method, in this paper,
a DJI Matrice 600 is selected as a case study, whose form factor (L × W × H) is set to
1668 mm × 1668 mm × 759 mm, and the calculated elliptical collision zero parameters
are 1445 mm × 1445 mm × 657 mm. The scenario range is set to 1000 m × 1000 m × 50 m,
considering that the collision avoidance area of small UAVs in the city will not be too large.
In the experimental scenario, we construct the spatial layout of buildings in the city
and set up ﬁxed-volume obstacles at ﬁxed locations; the building collision zero is cylindrical,
and the shape parameters are shown in Table 2. The experiment was based on eight UAVs,
each with an initial speed and initial heading. At the beginning of training, a random origin
is generated for each UAV and the terminal, and the agent assigns avoidance actions to
UAVs according to the action space in Equation (5), and returns to the origin to restart the
training if a UAV has a collision accident. The experimental parameters are as shown in
Table 3, and the environment is as shown in Figure 6.
Table 2. The shape parameters of the building.
Obstacle Number X (m) Y (m) R (m) Z (m) Obstacle Number X (m) Y (m) R (m) Z (m)
1 500 500 80 100 6 245 458 30 89
2 200 200 15 70 7 660 150 40 56
3 900 567 25 85 8 900 328 22 78
4 850 820 35 80 9 326 895 17 78
5 150 698 18 60 10 628 736 20 91
Table 3. Parameter value.
Parameter Value
Total number of training episodes 5000
Discount factor 0.99
Target network update rate 0.001
Buffer size 10,000
Batch size 100
The initial destination area radius: R 10
Attenuation coefﬁcient: C 0.8
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14  of  22 
 
 
 
(a)  (b) 
Figure 6. The experimental environment. (a) Two‐dimensional perspective. (b) Three‐dimensional 
perspective. 
 
Figure 7. The rewards for each episode during training. 
The comparison eﬀect of the improved DDPG algorithm with the original algorithm 
is shown in Figure 8. It can be seen that the improved algorithm demonstrates a better 
improvement in convergence speed, achieving a higher reward value and showing a con‐
vergence trend of around 380 training epochs, while the original algorithm was only able 
to show such an eﬀect after around 1000 epochs. After the 2000th training epoch, the re‐
wards obtained by the two algorithms did not diﬀer much. However, as for actual train‐
ing,  the improved  DDPG  algorithm  obtained  stable reward  values  and determined  the 
convergence trend at earlier epochs, and  thus  training can  be ended  earlier than in the 
original algorithm, which saves training time. 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of the convergence process. 
Figure 6. The experimental environment. (a) Two-dimensional perspective. (b) Three-dimensional
perspective.

===== PAGE 14 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 14 of 22
4.2. Collision Avoidance Agent Training
For various conﬂicts arising from UAV pairs, the trained agent can provide appropriate
solutions. During training, the average reward obtained per episode is an important
indicator of convergence and collision avoidance performance. Using the improved DDPG
algorithm to train agents, the rewards for each episode are shown in Figure 7.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14  of  22 
 
 
 
(a)  (b) 
Figure 6. The experimental environment. (a) Two‐dimensional perspective. (b) Three‐dimensional 
perspective. 
 
Figure 7. The rewards for each episode during training. 
The comparison eﬀect of the improved DDPG algorithm with the original algorithm 
is shown in Figure 8. It can be seen that the improved algorithm demonstrates a better 
improvement in convergence speed, achieving a higher reward value and showing a con‐
vergence trend of around 380 training epochs, while the original algorithm was only able 
to show such an eﬀect after around 1000 epochs. After the 2000th training epoch, the re‐
wards obtained by the two algorithms did not diﬀer much. However, as for actual train‐
ing,  the improved  DDPG  algorithm  obtained  stable reward  values  and determined  the 
convergence trend at earlier epochs, and  thus  training can  be ended  earlier than in the 
original algorithm, which saves training time. 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of the convergence process. 
Figure 7. The rewards for each episode during training.
From Figure 7, the reward obtained by the agent is not stable at the beginning of the
training, as the agent touches the events with a higher degree of punishment during the
exploration process, resulting in a large degree of reward drop. With continuous training,
the agent gradually learns the high-reward behavior, and the reward value increases. In
the second half of training, the reward did not signiﬁcantly fall again, which indicates that
the improved algorithm learned a better and more stable strategy, and therefore the reward
oscillated less.
The comparison effect of the improved DDPG algorithm with the original algorithm
is shown in Figure 8. It can be seen that the improved algorithm demonstrates a better
improvement in convergence speed, achieving a higher reward value and showing a
convergence trend of around 380 training epochs, while the original algorithm was only
able to show such an effect after around 1000 epochs. After the 2000th training epoch,
the rewards obtained by the two algorithms did not differ much. However, as for actual
training, the improved DDPG algorithm obtained stable reward values and determined
the convergence trend at earlier epochs, and thus training can be ended earlier than in the
original algorithm, which saves training time.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14  of  22 
 
 
 
(a)  (b) 
Figure 6. The experimental environment. (a) Two‐dimensional perspective. (b) Three‐dimensional 
perspective. 
 
Figure 7. The rewards for each episode during training. 
The comparison eﬀect of the improved DDPG algorithm with the original algorithm 
is shown in Figure 8. It can be seen that the improved algorithm demonstrates a better 
improvement in convergence speed, achieving a higher reward value and showing a con‐
vergence trend of around 380 training epochs, while the original algorithm was only able 
to show such an eﬀect after around 1000 epochs. After the 2000th training epoch, the re‐
wards obtained by the two algorithms did not diﬀer much. However, as for actual train‐
ing,  the improved  DDPG  algorithm  obtained  stable reward  values  and determined  the 
convergence trend at earlier epochs, and  thus  training can  be ended  earlier than in the 
original algorithm, which saves training time. 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of the convergence process. 
Figure 8. Comparison of the convergence process.

===== PAGE 15 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 15 of 22
4.3. Numerical Results Analysis
4.3.1. Collision Avoidance Results
Using the two −layer resolution framework, we obtained the collision avoidance
results, as shown in Figure 9, while recording the distance between each UAV and the
nearest obstacle, as well as the distance between the two nearest UAVs.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15  of  22 
 
4.3. Numerical Results Analysis 
4.3.1. Collision Avoidance Results 
Using the two−layer resolution framework, we obtained the collision avoidance re‐
sults, as shown in Figure 9, while recording the distance between each UA V and the near‐
est obstacle, as well as the distance between the two nearest UA Vs. 
 
Figure 9. Collision avoidance results. 
From a two‐dimensional perspective, it is intuitively apparent that every UA V is in 
conﬂict with at least one obstacle and avoids obstacles with as little extra ﬂight distance 
as possible. In addition, there is a risk of conﬂict between UA V5 and UAV6, UAV7 and 
UAV8, and UAV1 and UA V7, so the agent randomly selects one of the UA Vs to perform 
the primary avoidance maneuver, while the other maintains almost its original direction 
(or makes minor adjustments), in order to minimize the impact of the avoidance behavior 
on normal navigation. In the three‐dimensional view, all the UA Vs have reached the in‐
tended altitude. 
The distance between each UA V and the obstacle has a process from small to large, 
which indicates that UA Vs are making avoidance actions. The closest UA V pairs may be 
diﬀerent at diﬀerent times, but the overall trend of distance variation is consistent, prov‐
ing  that  the  UA Vs  can  also  avoid  each  other.  The  minimum  distance  from  buildings  is 
about 7 m, and the minimum distance from other UA Vs is about 4 m throughout the whole 
process, thus meeting the standard safety interval, proving that the model in this paper 
can ensure the safe operation of UA Vs in cities with many buildings. 
4.3.2. Avoidance Strategy Analysis 
In the two−layer resolution framework, three strategies are used for collision avoid‐
ance and destination guidance, to analyze the avoidance action selection pattern by the 
agent, recording the actions (heading angle, altitude, speed change) selected by all UA Vs 
at each step, as shown in Figures 10–12. 
As shown in Figure 10, each approach of UA Vs and obstacles will lead to a signiﬁcant 
change in the heading angle, and when the distance is kept at a relatively safe level, the 
change in heading angle will ﬂuctuate around 0°, indicating that the UA V is ﬂying along 
a straight line in the horizontal direction. It can be determined that the agent avoids colli‐
sion with obstacles mainly by changing the heading angle of the UAV. 
Figure 9. Collision avoidance results.
From a two-dimensional perspective, it is intuitively apparent that every UAV is in
conﬂict with at least one obstacle and avoids obstacles with as little extra ﬂight distance
as possible. In addition, there is a risk of conﬂict between UAV5 and UAV6, UAV7 and
UAV8, and UAV1 and UAV7, so the agent randomly selects one of the UAVs to perform
the primary avoidance maneuver, while the other maintains almost its original direction
(or makes minor adjustments), in order to minimize the impact of the avoidance behavior
on normal navigation. In the three-dimensional view, all the UAVs have reached the
intended altitude.
The distance between each UAV and the obstacle has a process from small to large,
which indicates that UAVs are making avoidance actions. The closest UAV pairs may be
different at different times, but the overall trend of distance variation is consistent, proving
that the UAVs can also avoid each other. The minimum distance from buildings is about
7 m, and the minimum distance from other UAVs is about 4 m throughout the whole
process, thus meeting the standard safety interval, proving that the model in this paper can
ensure the safe operation of UAVs in cities with many buildings.
4.3.2. Avoidance Strategy Analysis
In the two−layer resolution framework, three strategies are used for collision avoid-
ance and destination guidance, to analyze the avoidance action selection pattern by the
agent, recording the actions (heading angle, altitude, speed change) selected by all UAVs at
each step, as shown in Figures 10–12.
As shown in Figure 10, each approach of UAVs and obstacles will lead to a signiﬁcant
change in the heading angle, and when the distance is kept at a relatively safe level, the
change in heading angle will ﬂuctuate around 0◦, indicating that the UAV is ﬂying along a
straight line in the horizontal direction. It can be determined that the agent avoids collision
with obstacles mainly by changing the heading angle of the UAV .
As shown in Figures 11 and 12, climbing and descending actions ensure that the height
of the UAV is ﬁnally consistent with the destination height, demonstrating that the agent
has the guiding ability in the three-dimensional space. The speed change is generally stable

===== PAGE 16 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 16 of 22
within a ﬁxed range, and there is no excessive speed, as the speed adjustment is coupled
with the heading angle to avoid collision with obstacles. In addition, due to there being
fewer obstacles near the destination, the UAV has a higher speed and a stable heading
angle in the later stage, ultimately reaching the destination.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16  of  22 
 
 
Figure 10. The heading angle change trend and distance to obstacles of UAV. 
 
Figure 11. The altitude change trend of UA V. 
 
Figure 12. The speed change trend of UA Vs. 
As  shown  in  Figures  11  and  12,  climbing  and  descending  actions  ensure  that  the 
height of the UA V is ﬁnally consistent with the destination height, demonstrating that the 
agent has the guiding ability in the three‐dimensional space. The speed change is gener‐
ally stable within a ﬁxed range, and there is no excessive speed, as the speed adjustment 
is coupled with the heading angle to avoid collision with obstacles. In addition, due to 
there being fewer obstacles near the destination, the UAV has a higher speed and a stable 
heading angle in the later stage, ultimately reaching the destination. 
Figure 10. The heading angle change trend and distance to obstacles of UAV .
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16  of  22 
 
 
Figure 10. The heading angle change trend and distance to obstacles of UAV. 
 
Figure 11. The altitude change trend of UA V. 
 
Figure 12. The speed change trend of UA Vs. 
As  shown  in  Figures  11  and  12,  climbing  and  descending  actions  ensure  that  the 
height of the UA V is ﬁnally consistent with the destination height, demonstrating that the 
agent has the guiding ability in the three‐dimensional space. The speed change is gener‐
ally stable within a ﬁxed range, and there is no excessive speed, as the speed adjustment 
is coupled with the heading angle to avoid collision with obstacles. In addition, due to 
there being fewer obstacles near the destination, the UAV has a higher speed and a stable 
heading angle in the later stage, ultimately reaching the destination. 
Figure 11. The altitude change trend of UAV .
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  16  of  22 
 
 
Figure 10. The heading angle change trend and distance to obstacles of UAV. 
 
Figure 11. The altitude change trend of UA V. 
 
Figure 12. The speed change trend of UA Vs. 
As  shown  in  Figures  11  and  12,  climbing  and  descending  actions  ensure  that  the 
height of the UA V is ﬁnally consistent with the destination height, demonstrating that the 
agent has the guiding ability in the three‐dimensional space. The speed change is gener‐
ally stable within a ﬁxed range, and there is no excessive speed, as the speed adjustment 
is coupled with the heading angle to avoid collision with obstacles. In addition, due to 
there being fewer obstacles near the destination, the UAV has a higher speed and a stable 
heading angle in the later stage, ultimately reaching the destination. 
Figure 12. The speed change trend of UAVs.
4.4. Performance Analysis
4.4.1. Performance Testing of the Method
To fully illustrate the collision avoidance effect of the method, 300 different scenarios
were designed in the simulation area by randomly generating the starting and ending

===== PAGE 17 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 17 of 22
points of eight UAVs. The considered performance metrics were the following: (1) collision
avoidance success rate (SR), which is the percentage of successful collision avoidance;
(2) computational efﬁciency (CE), which is the time required for an agent to calculate an
action; (3) extra ﬂight distance (ED), which is the record of extra distance the UAV ﬂighted
due to collision avoidance.
(1) Collision avoidance success rate
In the 300 random scenarios, 4523 conﬂicts were recorded in the conﬂict resolution
pool, including 867 conﬂicts with other UAVs and 3656 conﬂicts with buildings. If the agent
cannot assign the correct avoidance action to a UAV , a collision will occur, according to the
current speed trend. The collision avoidance method described in this paper can guide
UAVs out of collision risk, with success rates as shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Success rates of collision avoidance.
With Buildings With Other UA Vs Total
Number of conﬂicts 3656 867 4523
Number of
resolutions 3502 796 4298
Success rate 95.79% 91.81% 95.03%
The data in Table 4 show that the method has a higher success rate when resolving
conﬂicts with ﬁxed obstacles than with dynamic obstacles, as the invading UAV has
positional uncertainty, the ﬂight state may not be fully perceived by the current UAV , and
no avoidance action can be taken in time. However, the overall success rate reached 95.03%,
indicating that the method is able to guide UAVs to avoid most collision risks and can
provide an adequate and reliable reference for urban air trafﬁc management.
(2) Computational efﬁciency
Recording the total computation time and the number of avoidance actions performed
by UAVs in each scenario, to calculate the average time that the method to plan an action
for a UAV , and this is used as the evaluation index for computation efﬁciency, as shown in
Equation (24).
Tj
f = Tj
total
8
∑
i=1
num j
i
(24)
where Tj
total is the total time required to calculate an avoidance action in scenario j, and
num j
i is the number of avoidance actions performed by UAV i.
The average time required for each scenario is shown in Figure 13. From the ﬁgure,
the avoidance action calculation time of 300 scenarios is at the 0.01 s level, with an average
time of 0.0963 s, which can meet the real-time requirements of collision avoidance.
(3) Extra ﬂight distance
When facing obstacles, the agent guides the UAV to change its heading or speed, which
adds extra ﬂight distance (ED) compared with the original trajectory. The metrics of ED are
used to measure the impact of collision avoidance on UAVs, as shown in Equation (25):
de = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(doi − dni) (25)
In Equation (25), de means the extra ﬂight distance (ED), doi means the distance of the
i-th trajectory directly to the destination regardless of any conﬂicts, dni means the distance
of the i-th trajectory which has considered the collision avoidance. n is the total number of
trajectories in all scenarios.

===== PAGE 18 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 18 of 22
From the perspective of ﬂight efﬁciency and green transportation, the shorter the ED,
the less ﬂight energy is lost, and the less impact there is on the original ﬂight [ 29]. The
average extra ﬂight distance of eight aircraft in 300 scenarios is 26.8 m, which is relatively
good and is acceptable in terms of a collaborative resolution process for mUAVs.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18  of  22 
 
In Equation (25), de means the extra ﬂight distance (ED), doi means the distance of the 
i‐th trajectory directly to the destination regardless of any conﬂicts, dni means the distance 
of the i‐th trajectory which has considered the collision avoidance. n is the total number 
of trajectories in all scenarios. 
From the perspective of ﬂight eﬃciency and green transportation, the shorter the ED, 
the less ﬂight energy is lost, and the less impact there is on the original ﬂight [29]. The 
average extra ﬂight distance of eight aircraft in 300 scenarios is 26.8 m, which is relatively 
good and is acceptable in terms of a collaborative resolution process for mUA Vs. 
 
Figure 13. The average time required for allocating actions in each scenario. 
4.4.2. Impact of Noisy States 
UA Vs may have positional uncertainty due to the interference of random factors such 
as crosswinds, which can aﬀect collision avoidance behavior. To investigate the robust‐
ness of the proposed method, we performed simulations with noisy states, adding noise 
to the state information of UAV. It was assumed that each noise component was uniformly 
distributed, i.e.,  𝑚ൌሾ 𝑚௫, 𝑚௬, 𝑚௭, 𝑚௩ሿ,  𝑚~𝑈ሺെ𝜀, 𝜀ሻ. The noise was added to the state in‐
formation of UA V, i.e., ,,ttt
ix iy izPx m y m z m     and  tt
iivVVm , which will change 
the state of the agent in Equation (4). 
Table  5  shows  the  SR  and ED  performances  with  noisy  states.  The  table  shows  that 
noise influences the SR and ED performance, meaning that the UAV does not have accurate 
position and velocity information, leading to biased observations by the agent, which may 
output incorrect avoidance actions. However, even if noise  𝜀ൌ 3  is added to both position 
and velocity information, SR is, at most, 91.61%, and ED is 36.2 m, and thus a good level is 
still maintained. Therefore, our method has high tolerance to noisy observations. 
Table 5. SR, and ED performance when states are noisy. 
  mx, mx, mx ≠ 0 
vx = 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟎 . 𝟓 
mx, mx, mx ≠ 0 
vx = 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟏 . 𝟓 
mx, mx, mx ≠ 0 
vx = 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟑   No Noise 
SR  94.32%  93.98%  92.90%  95.03% 
ED  27.2 m  30.3 m  35.6 m  26.8 m 
  mx, mx, mx = 0 
vx ≠ 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟎 . 𝟓 
mx, mx, mx = 0 
vx ≠ 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟏 . 𝟓 
mx, mx, mx = 0 
vx ≠ 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟑    
SR  94.54%  93.52%  93.3%   
ED  27.5 m  29.6 m  34.3 m  
  mx, mx, mx ≠ 0 
vx ≠ 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟎 . 𝟓 
mx, mx, mx ≠ 0 
vx ≠ 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟏 . 𝟓 
mx, mx, mx ≠ 0 
vx ≠ 0,  𝜺ൌ𝟑    
SR  94.01%  92.83%  91.61%  
ED  27.6 m  33.3 m  36.2 m  
Figure 13. The average time required for allocating actions in each scenario.
4.5. Impact of Noisy States
UAVs may have positional uncertainty due to the interference of random factors such
as crosswinds, which can affect collision avoidance behavior. To investigate the robustness
of the proposed method, we performed simulations with noisy states, adding noise to
the state information of UAV . It was assumed that each noise component was uniformly
distributed, i.e., m =
[
mx, my, mz, mv
]
, m ∼ U(−ε, ε). The noise was added to the state
information of UAV , i.e.,P =
[
xt
i + mx, yt
i + my, zt
i + mz
]
and Vt
i = Vt
i + mv, which will
change the state of the agent in Equation (4).
Table 5 shows the SR and ED performances with noisy states. The table shows that
noise inﬂuences the SR and ED performance, meaning that the UAV does not have accurate
position and velocity information, leading to biased observations by the agent, which may
output incorrect avoidance actions. However, even if noise ε = 3 is added to both position
and velocity information, SR is, at most, 91.61%, and ED is 36.2 m, and thus a good level is
still maintained. Therefore, our method has high tolerance to noisy observations.
Table 5. SR, and ED performance when states are noisy.
mx, mx, mx ̸= 0
vx = 0, ε = 0.5
mx, mx, mx ̸= 0
vx = 0, ε = 1.5
mx, mx, mx ̸= 0
vx = 0, ε = 3 No Noise
SR 94.32% 93.98% 92.90% 95.03%
ED 27.2 m 30.3 m 35.6 m 26.8 m
mx, mx, mx = 0
vx ̸= 0, ε = 0.5
mx, mx, mx = 0
vx ̸= 0, ε = 1.5
mx, mx, mx = 0
vx ̸= 0, ε = 3
SR 94.54% 93.52% 93.3%
ED 27.5 m 29.6 m 34.3 m
mx, mx, mx ̸= 0
vx ̸= 0, ε = 0.5
mx, mx, mx ̸= 0
vx ̸= 0, ε = 1.5
mx, mx, mx ̸= 0
vx ̸= 0, ε = 3
SR 94.01% 92.83% 91.61%
ED 27.6 m 33.3 m 36.2 m
4.6. Different Numbers of UAVs
Table 6 presents the CR, SR, and DR performances in scenarios with different numbers
of UAVs J ∈ {2, 4, 8, 10, 12, 20}. The rates are averaged over 300 random realizations (all
UAVs having random starting points and destinations). From the table, it can be noted that
with increasing numbers of UAVs, the SR decreases due to the higher risk of collision, the
ED has an overall upward trend, while the CE is not affected by the number of UAVs.

===== PAGE 19 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 19 of 22
Table 6. SR, CE, and ED performance with different numbers of UAVs.
J = 2 J = 4 J = 8 J = 10 J = 12 J = 20
SR 100% 99.1% 95.03% 95.62% 92.10% 90.56%
CE 0.0832 s 0.0721 s 0.0963 s 0.1861 s 0.0910 s 0.216 s
ED 20.3 m 25.2 m 26.8 m 27.6 m 39.1 m 38.2 m
We note that when there are 20 UAVs in an urban scenario of 1 square kilometer, our
method still maintains a success rate of more than 90% in terms of conﬂict, indicating that
this method can provide safe guidance for 20 UAVs in that area, which is sufﬁcient to adapt
to the current scale of urban UAVs.
In Figure 14, illustrations of collision avoidance in scenarios with different numbers
of UAVs J ∈ {2, 8, 20} are presented. From Figure 14, it can be observed that due to the
different locations and numbers of UAVs, the agent may determine different avoidance
actions when facing collision risks, leading to different trajectories.
Drones 2023, 7, x FOR PEER REVIEW  19  of  22 
 
4.4.3. Diﬀerent Numbers of UA Vs 
Table 6 presents the CR, SR, and DR performances in scenarios with diﬀerent num‐
bers of UA Vs J ∈ {2, 4, 8, 10, 12, 20}. The rates are averaged over 300 random realizations 
(all UAVs having random starting points and destinations). From the table, it can be noted 
that with increasing numbers of UA Vs, the SR decreases due to the higher risk of collision, 
the ED has an overall upward trend, while the CE is not aﬀected by the number of UAVs. 
Table 6. SR, CE, and ED performance with diﬀerent numbers of UA Vs. 
  J = 2  J = 4  J = 8  J = 10  J = 12  J = 20 
SR  100%  99.1%  95.03%  95.62%  92.10%  90.56% 
CE  0.0832 s  0.0721 s  0.0963 s  0.1861 s  0.0910 s  0.216 s 
ED  20.3 m  25.2 m  26.8 m  27.6 m  39.1 m  38.2 m 
We note that when there are 20 UA Vs in an urban scenario of 1 square kilometer, our 
method still maintains a success rate of more than 90% in terms of conﬂict, indicating that 
this  method  can  provide  safe  guidance  for  20  UAVs  in  that  area,  which  is  suﬃcient  to 
adapt to the current scale of urban UA Vs. 
In Figure 14, illustrations of collision avoidance in scenarios with diﬀerent numbers 
of UA Vs J ∈ {2, 8, 20} are presented. From Figure 14, it can be observed that due to the 
diﬀerent locations and numbers of UA Vs, the agent may determine diﬀerent avoidance 
actions when facing collision risks, leading to diﬀerent trajectories. 
 
Figure 14. Illustrations of collision avoidance in diﬀerent scenarios that J ∈ {2, 8, 20}. 
4.4.4. Comparison with Other Algorithms 
In the same scenario, two other algorithms are selected for comparison: the double 
deep Q network (DDQN) and the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld (APF). 
DDQN is a typical value‐based DRL algorithm [18,19], while APF utilizes the repul‐
sive force of obstacles and the gravitational force of target to guide the UA V motion, and 
is widely used in research on collision avoidance [30,31]. DDQN requires that the agent 
action  space  be  discrete,  which  is  set  to  ∆𝜑 ∈ ሼെ3°, 0, 3°ሽ ,  ∆𝑍 ∈ ሼെ1 m, 0 m, 1 mሽ , ∆𝑉 ∈
ሼെ2 m/s, 0 m/s, 2 m/sሽ. The APF action space is consistent with our method. Experiments 
using DDQN were conducted based on a two−layer resolution framework, and the APF 
was  divided  into  two  categories: APF  with  a  two−layer  framework  and APF  without  a 
two−layer framework. Table 7 presents the performances of the diﬀerent algorithms. 
The improved DDPG algorithm has an absolute advantage in terms of the SR, which 
is much greater than the other algorithms, at 95.03%. There was not much diﬀerence in 
CE, and only APF was higher than the other algorithms. Our method achieved the mini‐
mum ED, which was the largest value in DDQN; because of the constraints of the discrete 
action space, the DDQN‐trained agent can only perform a limited number of action values 
and the ﬂexibility of the UAV cannot be fully utilized. In addition, the performance of the 
Figure 14. Illustrations of collision avoidance in different scenarios that J ∈ {2, 8, 20}.
4.7. Comparison with Other Algorithms
In the same scenario, two other algorithms are selected for comparison: the double
deep Q network (DDQN) and the artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld (APF).
DDQN is a typical value-based DRL algorithm [ 18,19], while APF utilizes the re-
pulsive force of obstacles and the gravitational force of target to guide the UAV motion,
and is widely used in research on collision avoidance [ 30,31]. DDQN requires that the
agent action space be discrete, which is set to ∆ϕ ∈ {−3◦, 0, 3◦}, ∆Z ∈ {−1 m, 0 m, 1 m},
∆V ∈ {−2 m/s, 0 m/s, 2 m/s}. The APF action space is consistent with our method. Exper-
iments using DDQN were conducted based on a two−layer resolution framework, and the
APF was divided into two categories: APF with a two−layer framework and APF without
a two−layer framework. Table 7 presents the performances of the different algorithms.
Table 7. SR, CE, and ED performance of different algorithms and J = 8.
SR CE ED
APF without two−layer framework 89.32% 1.8329 s 41.2 m
APF with two−layer framework 91.65% 0.0821 s 34.3 m
DDQN 93.83% 0.1839 s 56.3 m
Improved DDPG 95.03% 0.0963 s 26.8 m
The improved DDPG algorithm has an absolute advantage in terms of the SR, which
is much greater than the other algorithms, at 95.03%. There was not much difference in CE,
and only APF was higher than the other algorithms. Our method achieved the minimum
ED, which was the largest value in DDQN; because of the constraints of the discrete action
space, the DDQN-trained agent can only perform a limited number of action values and
the ﬂexibility of the UAV cannot be fully utilized. In addition, the performance of the APF

===== PAGE 20 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 20 of 22
with a two−layer framework was superior to that of the original APF algorithm, indicating
that the two−layer resolution framework can better avoid conﬂict risks when presented
with mUAVs.
It is worth noting that we observed in training sessions that the improved DDPG
completed convergence faster than the DDQN, which is consistent with our results in
Section 4.2, compared to the original DDPG algorithm, and further indicates that the
dynamic adjustment mechanism can reduce the number of training episodes.
5. Conclusions
In this paper, an adaptive method for mUAV collision avoidance in urban air trafﬁc
was studied. The main conclusions are as follows:
Firstly, the proposed two−layer resolution framework provides a new concept for
realizing mUAV collision avoidance, in which each UAV is endowed with decision-making
ability, and the computational complexity is controlled at the polynomial level. Using the
improved DDPG algorithm to train the agent allows convergence to be completed faster,
which saves training costs to a great extent.
Secondly, the numerical results indicate that the proposed method is able to adapt to
various scenarios, e.g., different numbers and positions of UAVs, and interference from
random factors. More speciﬁcally, the average decision time of the method is 0.0963 s with
eight UAVs, the overall resolution success rate is 95.03%, and the extra ﬂight distance is
26.8 m. Our method has better performance when compared to APF, APF with a two−layer
framework, and DDQN.
Thirdly, from the perspective of the avoidance process, changing the heading angle
is the main way of avoiding collision, the minimum distance from buildings is about 7 m,
and the minimum distance from other UAVs is about 4 m, which further proves that the
method has a relatively high sensitivity for static obstacles. Our future research focus
will be on how to determine the appropriate safety interval and how to reﬂect this in the
resolution process.
Despite the strengths of our proposed approach, there are some drawbacks that
require further study. In this paper, distance and velocity vector were calculated for conﬂict
detection, which lacks objective quantiﬁcation of conﬂict risk and may have an impact on
the subsequent collision avoidance. The quantitative assessment of UAV conﬂict risk based
on multiple factors could guarantee a more accurate determination of conﬂict targets and
resolution strategies, which would be a valuable research direction in the future. Another
valuable research direction would be to combine kinematics theory and control theory.
Assigning appropriate resolution strategies for UAV collision avoidance at the level of
urban air trafﬁc management, while designing UAV controllers from the perspective of
control performance, thus ensuring that UAVs can successfully complete avoidance actions
by formulating suitable control parameters and suppressing the inﬂuence of external
disturbances [32,33]. This would promote the engineering application of the method
described in this paper.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.Z.; methodology, J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang) and H.Z.; soft-
ware, J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang) and J.Z. (Jinlun Zhou); validation, J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang), M.H. and G.Z.;
formal analysis, J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang) and H.L.; investigation, M.H. and J.Z. (Jinlun Zhou); resources,
J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang), H.Z. and H.L.; writing—original draft preparation, J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang);
writing—review and editing, J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang) and M.H.; visualization, J.Z. (Jinpeng Zhang) and
M.H. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (71971114).
Data Availability Statement: Data will be made available on request.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

===== PAGE 21 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 21 of 22
Abbreviations
Du, Do The collision zone of UAV and building
ϕ The heading angle, horizontal speed and latitude
V The horizontal speed of UAV
Z The latitude of UAV
ϕg The relative heading angle of the destination to UAV
dg The horizontal distance of the destination to UAV
ϕus The difference in heading angle between two UAV
Zus The difference in altitude between two UAV
dus The horizontal distance between two UAV
ddet The UAV detection distance
π(s; θ) Policy network
π(s; θ−) Target policy network
πθ(si) The learned policy function
i, j Superscript or subscript, denote the speciﬁc UAV
∆ϕ Alteration in direction
∆Z Alteration in altitude
∆V Alteration in horizontal speed
dom The distance attribute of obstacle in sector m
Rd Destination intent or collision avoidance reward
Ruu The UAV collision avoidance reward
Rex The additional reward
S The state space of agent
A The action space of agent
P The collision resolution pool
Q(s, a; ω) Q network
Q(s, a; ω−) Target Q network
Qω(s, a) The learned value function
t Subscript, denote the speciﬁc moment
References
1. Garrow, L.A.; German, B.J.; Leonard, C.E. Urban air mobility: A comprehensive review and comparative analysis with au-
tonomous and electric ground transportation for informing future research. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol. 2021, 132, 103377.
[CrossRef]
2. Barrado, C.; Boyero, M.; Brucculeri, L.; Ferrara, G.; Hately , A.; Hullah, P .; Martin-Marrero, D.; Pastor, E.; Rushton, A.P .; V olkert, A.
U-Space Concept of Operations: A Key Enabler for Opening Airspace to Emerging Low-Altitude Operations.Aerospace2020, 7, 24.
[CrossRef]
3. 2022 Civil Aviation Development Statistical Bulletin. 2023. Available online: https://ﬁle.veryzhun.com/buckets/carnoc/keys/
7390295f32633128e6e5cee44fc9fe4e.pdf (accessed on 1 May 2023).
4. Kiran, B.R.; Sobh, I.; Talpaert, V .; Mannion, P .; Sallab, A.A.A.; Yogamani, S.; P érez, P . Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Autonomous Driving: A Survey. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2022, 23, 4909–4926. [CrossRef]
5. Wu, Y. A survey on population-based meta-heuristic algorithms for motion planning of aircraft. Swarm Evol. Comput. 2021,
62, 100844. [CrossRef]
6. Zeng, D.; Chen, H.; Yu, Y.; Hu, Y.; Deng, Z.; Leng, B.; Xiong, L.; Sun, Z. UGV Parking Planning Based on Swarm Optimization
and Improved CBS in High-Density Scenarios for Innovative Urban Mobility. Drones 2023, 7, 295. [CrossRef]
7. Zhao, P .; Erzberger, H.; Liu, Y. Multiple-Aircraft-Conﬂict Resolution Under Uncertainties.J. Guid. Control Dyn. 2021, 44, 2031–2049.
[CrossRef]
8. Yun, S.C.; Ganapathy, V .; Chien, T.W. Enhanced D* Lite Algorithm for mobile robot navigation. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE
Symposium on Industrial Electronics and Applications (ISIEA), Penang, Malaysia, 3–5 October 2010; pp. 545–550.
9. Wu, Y.; Low, K.H.; Pang, B.; Tan, Q. Swarm-Based 4D Path Planning For Drone Operations in Urban Environments.IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol. 2021, 70, 7464–7479. [CrossRef]
10. Zhang, Q.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, H.; Jiang, C.; Hu, M. SMILO-VTAC Model Based Multi-Aircraft Conﬂict Resolution Method in
Complex Low-Altitude Airspace. J. Trafﬁc Transp. Eng. 2019, 19, 125–136.
11. Radmanesh, M.; Kumar, M. Flight formation of UAVs in presence of moving obstacles using fast-dynamic mixed integer linear
programming. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2016, 50, 149–160. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 22 / 22 =====
Drones 2023, 7, 491 22 of 22
12. Waen, J.D.; Dinh, H.T.; Torres, M.H.C.; Holvoet, T. Scalable multirotor UAV trajectory planning using mixed integer linear
programming. In Proceedings of the 2017 European Conference on Mobile Robots (ECMR), Paris, France, 6–8 September 2017;
pp. 1–6.
13. Alonso-Ayuso, A.; Escudero, L.F.; Martín-Campo, F.J. An exact multi-objective mixed integer nonlinear optimization approach for
aircraft conﬂict resolution. TOP 2016, 24, 381–408. [CrossRef]
14. Mnih, V .; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Silver, D.; Rusu, A.A.; Veness, J.; Bellemare, M.G.; Graves, A.; Riedmiller, M.; Fidjeland, A.K.;
Ostrovski, G.; et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 2015, 518, 529–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Silver, D.; Huang, A.; Maddison, C.J.; Guez, A.; Sifre, L.; van den Driessche, G.; Schrittwieser, J.; Antonoglou, I.; Panneershelvam,
V .; Lanctot, M.; et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search.Nature 2016, 529, 484–489. [CrossRef]
16. Pham, H.X.; La, H.M.; Feil-Seifer, D.; Nguyen, L.V . Autonomous uav navigation using reinforcement learning. arXiv 2018,
arXiv:1801.05086.
17. Liu, X.; Liu, Y.; Chen, Y. Reinforcement Learning in Multiple-UAV Networks: Deployment and Movement Design.IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol. 2019, 68, 8036–8049. [CrossRef]
18. Singla, A.; Padakandla, S.; Bhatnagar, S. Memory-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning for Obstacle Avoidance in UAV with
Limited Environment Knowledge. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 2021, 22, 107–118. [CrossRef]
19. Zhai, P .; Zhang, Y.; Shaobo, W. Intelligent Ship Collision Avoidance Algorithm Based on DDQN with Prioritized Experience
Replay under COLREGs. J. Mar. Sci. Eng. 2022, 10, 585. [CrossRef]
20. Li, C.; Gu, W.; Zheng, Y.; Huang, L.; Zhang, X. An ETA-Based Tactical Conﬂict Resolution Method for Air Logistics Transportation.
Drones 2023, 7, 334. [CrossRef]
21. Lillicrap, T.P .; Hunt, J.J.; Pritzel, A.; Heess, N.; Erez, T.; Tassa, Y.; Silver, D.; Wierstra, D. Continuous control with deep
reinforcement learning. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1509.02971.
22. Ribeiro, M.; Ellerbroek, J.; Hoekstra, J. Improvement of conﬂict detection and resolution at high densities through reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the ICRAT2020: International Conference on Research in Air Transportation 2020, Tampa, FL, USA,
23–26 June 2020.
23. Rubí, B.; Morcego, B.; Pérez, R. Deep reinforcement learning for quadrotor path following with adaptive velocity.Auton. Robot.
2021, 45, 119–134. [CrossRef]
24. Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Yu, Z. Path Following Control for UAV Using Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach.Guid. Navig. Control
2021, 1, 18. [CrossRef]
25. Wen, H.; Li, H.; Wang, Z.; Hou, X.; He, K. Application of DDPG-based Collision Avoidance Algorithm in Air Trafﬁc Control. In
Proceedings of the 2019 12th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID), Hangzhou, China,
14–15 December 2019; pp. 130–133.
26. Hu, J.; Yang, X.; Wang, W.; Wei, P .; Ying, L.; Liu, Y. Obstacle Avoidance for UAS in Continuous Action Space Using Deep
Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 90623–90634. [CrossRef]
27. Zhang, H.; Zhang, J.; Zhong, G.; Liu, H.; Liu, W. Multivariate Combined Collision Detection for Multi-Unmanned Aircraft
Systems. IEEE Access 2022, 10, 103827–103839. [CrossRef]
28. Qiu, C.; Hu, Y.; Chen, Y.; Zeng, B. Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)-Based Energy Harvesting Wireless Communica-
tions. IEEE Internet Things J. 2019, 6, 8577–8588. [CrossRef]
29. Bagdi, Z.; Csámer, L.; Bakó, G. The green light for air transport: Sustainable aviation at present. Cogn. Sustain. 2023, 2. [CrossRef]
30. Guo, Y.; Liu, X.; Jiang, W.; Zhang, W. Collision-Free 4D Dynamic Path Planning for Multiple UAVs Based on Dynamic Priority
RRT* and Artiﬁcial Potential Field. Drones 2023, 7, 180. [CrossRef]
31. Sun, J.; Tang, J.; Lao, S. Collision Avoidance for Cooperative UAVs with Optimized Artiﬁcial Potential Field Algorithm.IEEE
Access 2017, 5, 18382–18390. [CrossRef]
32. Song, J.; Hu, Y.; Su, J.; Zhao, M.; Ai, S. Fractional-Order Linear Active Disturbance Rejection Control Design and Optimization
Based Improved Sparrow Search Algorithm for Quadrotor UAV with System Uncertainties and External Disturbance.Drones
2022, 6, 229. [CrossRef]
33. Bauer, P .; Ritzinger, G.; Soumelidis, A.; Bokor, J. LQ servo control design with Kalman ﬁlter for a quadrotor UAV .Period. Polytech.
Transp. Eng. 2008, 36, 9–14. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.