SOURCE: references/MainPaper/wevj-15-00300-v2.pdf
PAGES: 18



===== PAGE 1 / 18 =====
Citation: Zheng, G.; Li, P .; Wu, D. An
Obstacle Avoidance Trajectory
Planning Methodology Based on
Energy Minimization (OTPEM) for
the Tilt-Wing eVTOL in the Takeoff
Phase. World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15,
300. https://doi.org/10.3390/
wevj15070300
Academic Editor: Kaushik
Rajashekara
Received: 17 April 2024
Revised: 16 June 2024
Accepted: 3 July 2024
Published: 6 July 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Article
An Obstacle Avoidance Trajectory Planning Methodology Based
on Energy Minimization (OTPEM) for the Tilt-Wing eVTOL in
the Takeoff Phase
Guangyu Zheng 1
 , Peng Li 1,2, *
 and Dongsu Wu 3
1 College of Automobile and Traffic Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China;
zgy18816266078@njfu.edu.cn
2 College of Design and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117575, Singapore
3 College of Civil Aviation, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China;
tissle@nuaa.edu.cn
* Correspondence: dawan007@njfu.edu.cn
Abstract: Electric tilt-wing flying cars are an efficient, economical, and environmentally friendly
solution to urban traffic congestion and travel efficiency issues. This article addresses the high energy
consumption and obstacle interference during the takeoff phase of the tilt-wing eVTOL (electric
Vertical Takeoff and Landing), proposing a trajectory planning method based on energy minimization
and obstacle avoidance. Firstly, based on the dynamics analysis, the relationship between energy
consumption, spatial trajectory, and obstacles is sorted out and the decision variables for the trajectory
planning problem with obstacle avoidance are determined. Secondly, based on the power discretiza-
tion during the takeoff phase, the energy minimization objective function is established and the
constraints of performance limitations and spatial obstacles are derived. Thirdly, by integrating the
optimization model with the SLSQP (Sequential Least Squares Quadratic Programming algorithm),
the second-order sequential quadratic programming model and decision variable update equations
are derived, establishing the solution process for the trajectory planning problem of the tilt-wing
eVTOL takeoff with obstacle avoidance. Finally, the Airbus Vahana A3 is taken as an example to verify
and validate the effectiveness, stability, and robustness of the model and optimization algorithm
proposed. The validation results show that the OTPEM (obstacle avoidance trajectory planning
methodology based on energy minimization) can effectively handle changes in the takeoff end state
and exhibits good stability and robustness in different obstacle environments. It can provide a certain
reference for the three-dimensional obstacle avoidance trajectory planning of Airbus Vahana A3 and
other tilt-wing eVTOL trajectory planning problems.
Keywords: eVTOL; takeoff phase; trajectory planning; obstacle avoidance; SLSQP
1. Introduction
With the intensification of urbanization, the growth rates of urban populations and
vehicle transport volumes have been increasing annually. However, urban ground trans-
portation is becoming saturated, leading to increased congestion and impediments to
mobility. Future cities require clean and sustainable transportation solutions, with green
and sustainable development being the trend and goal of future transportation devel-
opment. One proposed concept is Urban Air Mobility (UAM), which primarily refers
to manned/unmanned aerial transportation systems that safely and efficiently conduct
passenger and cargo transport within cities or between urban areas.
With the introduction of the concept of Urban Air Mobility [1], eVTOL (electric Vertical
Takeoff and Landing, also known as flying cars), as a kind of carrier that combines the
advantages of aircraft and automobile performance, has attracted great attention from many
scholars for its advantages of high transportation efficiency, convenient and economical
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300. https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj15070300 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/wevj

===== PAGE 2 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 2 of 18
use, point-to-point transportation, energy sustainability, and environmental protection [2].
In May 2023, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) of the United States released
“Urban Air Mobility (UAM) Operations Concept 2.0” [ 3]. In the same year in July, the
FAA formally published “Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) Implementation Plan V1.0”, with
plans to achieve the large-scale operation of eVTOL by 2028. According to the form of
power system, eVTOL can be divided into the pure electric rotor type (such as China
Yihang’s EHang216), the electric tilt-wing type (such as Airbus’s A 3 Vahana), and the
electric rotor and propulsion rotor hybrid type (such as Boeing’s PAV) [ 4]. Compared
with other flying cars, tilt-wing eVTOLs combine the dual performance advantages of
fixed-wing and rotary-wing vehicles with the advantages of long range, relatively low
energy consumption, flexible takeoff and landing, and faster transport speed [5].
Restricted by the status quo of urban infrastructure [6] and the requirements of point-
to-point transportation [7], the takeoff trajectories of electric rotor and tilt-wing eVTOL
currently face the challenges of many obstacles and complications [8–10], which further
increase the energy consumption during the takeoff phase. It also introduces safety hazards
into the already high-risk takeoff and landing process, while affecting the range and
economic operation of eVTOL. Therefore, in order to further improve the safety and
practical performance of eVTOL, it is necessary to conduct a comprehensive study on the
optimization of energy consumption, obstacle avoidance, and trajectory planning in the
takeoff phase of eVTOL.
There are many trajectory planning algorithms currently used to solve the problem
of juggling energy optimization and obstacle avoidance, and heuristic algorithms are one
of them. Heuristic algorithms are a class of algorithms related to optimization methods
that require large computing power. They have flourished alongside the development
of computer technology, including the A* algorithm, particle swarm algorithm, genetic
algorithm, and ant colony algorithm. Some of the heuristic algorithms have a certain degree
of randomness, and their solution process tends to fall into a local optimum. Duan H et al.
proposed a 3D path planning algorithm for unmanned combat aircraft based on a hybrid
heuristic ant colony algorithm and differential evolutionary algorithm for unmanned
combat aircraft for the 3D path planning problem of unmanned combat aircraft. In using
the evolutionary algorithm to optimize the pheromone paths of the improved ant colony
optimization model, the unmanned aircraft can then find a safe path by connecting selected
nodes in a 3D grid while avoiding threat areas and consuming the least amount of fuel [11].
This method retains the robustness of the basic ant colony algorithm but is uncertain
and difficult to analyze when applied to urban air traffic, and its convergence speed is
difficult to guarantee. Gutierrez-Martinez M A et al. proposed an algorithm capable of
generating navigational waypoints, achieving short flight distances and avoiding collisions
with obstacles. A genetic algorithm is used to obtain waypoints using multi-objective
functions that include the path length, the distance from the waypoint to the obstacle, and
the probability that the final trajectory will cross the obstacle [12]. The method is sensitive
to the choice of initial values and tends to fall into local optimal solutions. Karahan M et al.
focused on the use of artificial intelligence to optimize UAVs for path planning and collision
avoidance. Simulations of path planning and collision avoidance were performed using
MATLAB R2020a under ideal and noisy conditions [13]. The results show that UAVs are
able to find the shortest path on the map to avoid collision with obstacles, but when dealing
with large environments and complex scenarios, it usually requires a lot of computational
resources and time for path planning and collision avoidance.
The trajectory planning problem is a special case of optimal control problems and
generally exhibits nonlinearity. This problem aims to minimize a performance metric while
satisfying boundary conditions and system dynamics. The direct method is a commonly
used trajectory planning approach that involves discretizing the trajectory planning prob-
lem and transforming it into a numerical optimization problem. Numerical analysis and
optimization methods are then used to compute the optimal solution. Again, the direct
method is sensitive to the selection of the initial parameters, and the selection of the ap-

===== PAGE 3 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 3 of 18
propriate parameter values requires a certain amount of experience and debugging. When
dealing with high-dimensional problems, a significant amount of computation is needed to
search for the optimal solution, leading to lower computational efficiency. Priyank Pradeep
et al. investigated the effect of wind on the optimal trajectory during flight [ 14]. The
study solved the optimal control problem numerically using the direct method of nonlinear
programming. By comparing the energy consumption and flight time of the optimal flight
trajectory under the influence of wind between origin and destination in an urban area
with those of a positive arc trajectory between the same origin and destination pairs, the
optimal flight trajectory under the influence of wind is determined for a short range. Wang
Z and colleagues proposed a trajectory optimization method for an electric Vertical Takeoff
and Landing flying car, focusing on the optimal control problem of multirotor eVTOL with
a fixed flight time. They convexified the problem to better achieve real-time trajectory
optimization within the required arrival time and conducted simulations using the E-Hang
184 eVTOL vehicle to validate the effectiveness of the method [15]. Xufei Yan and colleagues
used the XV-15 tilt-rotor aircraft as an example to establish an augmented flight dynamics
model suitable for trajectory optimization after single-engine failure in tiltrotor aircraft. The
research conducted computational analysis and employed a direct transcription method to
convert the optimal control strategies and trajectory optimization problem during land-
ing into a nonlinear programming problem. They solved the problem using a sequential
quadratic programming algorithm, providing a basis for the safe landing implementation
by the pilot in the event of single-engine failure [16]. Pradeep P et al. studied the landing
trajectory planning of a multirotor flying car with a given arrival time, transformed the
trajectory planning problem into an optimal control problem, and solved it numerically
to obtain the most energy-efficient landing trajectory [ 17]. Shamsheer S. Chauhan and
Joaquim R. R. A. Martins et al. studied the cruise trajectory of a tilt-rotor electric Vertical
Takeoff and Landing flying car [18]. The study used a simplified two-degree-of-freedom
model of the Airbus Vahana A3 tilt-wing eVTOL, for which takeoff trajectories with and
without stall and acceleration constraints were investigated. However, the study did not
consider the influence of the environment on the takeoff trajectory. The flying car will ulti-
mately be integrated into urban traffic. When travelling within the city, the starting point of
the journey may be in the city square, and the surrounding buildings will inevitably have
an impact on the takeoff. Therefore, obstacle avoidance is crucial in Urban Air Mobility.
In summary, this paper integrates the three problems of the energy optimization,
obstacle avoidance, and trajectory planning of a tilt-wing eVTOL in the takeoff phase. Con-
sidering constraints such as the performance of eVTOL and the surrounding environment,
the paper will study the modelling method and solution algorithm of the comprehensive
optimization problem. The specific contents are as follows: In the second part, considering
the effects of downwash and wake, as well as the coupling effects of thrust and induced
velocity, a parameterized energy calculation model and dynamic model will be established.
Based on this, decision variables, objective functions, and constraints for obstacle avoidance
trajectory planning will be defined and quantified to complete the construction of the
optimization model. In the third part, the paper will integrate the optimization model
with the SLSQP algorithm’s gradient descent search and state iteration process to design a
solution algorithm for the tilt-wing eVTOL takeoff obstacle avoidance trajectory planning
problem. In the fourth part, the model and the solution method of this paper are validated
for feasibility, effectiveness, and robustness in two cases, with and without obstacles. In
the case of obstacles, this article sets the takeoff environment around Purple Mountain. It
selects two different terrains and obtains their longitudinal profile data to use as constraints
for obstacles. Finally, the conclusions and reference value of this paper will be elaborated
upon in the last section.

===== PAGE 4 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 4 of 18
2. Optimization Model
First, the two-degree-of-freedom dynamics and kinematics equations (horizontal and
vertical displacements in the longitudinal plane) of the tilt-wing eVTOL are established.
 .
v = FA+FP+FG
m.
r = v (1)
.
v is the acceleration. FA =
h
FAx, FAy
iT
is the aerodynamic force, including wing lift,
wing drag, and fuselage drag, where FAx is the horizontal component of the aerodynamic
force and FAy is the vertical component of the aerodynamic force. FP =
h
FPx, FPy
iT
is the
propulsion force generated by the propeller, where FPx is the horizontal component of the
propulsion force and FPy is the vertical component of the propulsion force. FG = [0, −mg]T
is the force of gravity. m is the mass of the eVTOL. g is the acceleration of the gravitational
force. r = [x, y]T is the position vector, x is the displacement in the horizontal direction,
and y is the displacement in the vertical direction. v =

vx, vy
T is the velocity vector, vx is
the velocity in the horizontal direction, and vy is the velocity in the vertical direction.
The lift of the wing L is calculated as follows:
L = 1
2 ρv2SCL (2)
ρ is the air density, S is the wing area, and CL and is the lift coefficient of the wing.
The drag of the wing D1 is calculated as follows:
D1 = 1
2 ρv2SCD (3)
CD is the drag coefficient of the wing.
According to [18], when a tilt-wing eVTOL is in flight, the wake created by the rotation
of the propeller acts on the wing and creates an induced velocity, which is calculated as
follows:
vi =

− V∞⊥
2 +
s
V2
∞⊥
4 + FP
2ρSP

 (4)
V∞⊥ is the component of the free-stream velocity over the propeller disc and SP is the
area of the propeller disc. Momentum theory is used to multiply vi by a factor and then
add it to v to calculate both the lift and drag of the wing under the influence of the wake
produced by the rotor.
The drag of the fuselage is calculated as follows:
D2 = 1
2 ρv2S f CD f (5)
S f is the reference area of the fuselage and CD f is the drag coefficient of the fuselage.
The propulsive force generated by the propeller is related to the propeller power
according to [18]. The propeller power can be calculated using the following formula:
PP = FPV∞⊥ + κFP

− V∞⊥
2 +
s
V2
∞⊥
4 + FP
2ρSP

 (6)
κ is a correction factor used to account for induced power losses associated with
non-uniform inflow, end effects, and other simplifications made in momentum theory.SP
is the area of the propeller disc.

===== PAGE 5 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 5 of 18
The aim of this paper is to minimize the energy consumption of the tilt-wing eVTOL
to reach a given state point, and then perform trajectory planning. The energy consumption
is mainly determined by the battery power P and flight time t. Due to the characteristics
of the tilt-wing eVTOL, the wing is tilted to change during the takeoff. The wing angle to
vertical θ is introduced here. θ and free-stream angle of attack affect the aerodynamic forces
on the wing. The propulsive force FP generated by the propeller can be calculated based
on the battery power that minimizes energy consumption. By combining aerodynamics
and the weight of the eVTOL, acceleration can be calculated using the dynamics equation.
Taking into account obstacles and relevant dynamic constraints, the planned trajectory can
be obtained based on the kinematic equation. The relationship between overall energy
consumption, trajectory, and obstacles is shown in Figure 1 below.
Figure 1. Map of the relationship between energy consumption, obstacle, and trajectory.
2.1. Decision Variables
The optimization model for the takeoff trajectory in this article is based on minimizing
energy consumption. In order to facilitate the solution of the motion state, objective function,
and constraints within a limited time, the involved motion equations are discretized,
thereby transforming the trajectory planning problem into a discrete optimization problem.
The takeoff phase trajectory is divided into n − 1 flight segments, i.e., n state points.
Assuming the total flight time is t, the time step for each segment is ∆t = t/(n − 1). For
the i-th state point, the discrete relationship between adjacent points can be represented
as follows: 


vi+1 = vi + ai∆t
ri+1 = ri + vi∆t
ai =
FAi +FPi +FG
m
(7)

===== PAGE 6 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 6 of 18
The instantaneous power provided by the battery at takeoff can be expressed as follows:
Pi = PP
η (8)
where η is the transmission efficiency and PP is the power at the propeller disc. The
instantaneous energy E consumption is given by
E(i) = Pi∆t (9)
The energy consumption during the entire takeoff process accumulates as the transient
energy consumption of the eVTOL increases with time. Therefore, this paper introduces the
discrete dynamics model into the energy consumption optimization model, approximating
the continuous takeoff process as n − 1 uniform acceleration sub-processes. The decision
variables of the optimization problem are determined as the wing angle to the vertical
(θ), the battery power (P), and the flight time (t). It is assumed that the wings are all at
equal angles to the vertical and the battery supplies the same amount of power to each
propeller. Since the wing angle to the vertical and the battery power are continuous func-
tions of time, the two curves are parameterized using a fourth-order B-spline. Each curve
is fitted with j uniformly spaced control points. The variables to be directly optimized are
θ =

θ1, θ2, θ3, . . . ,θj
T, P =

P1, P2, P3, . . . ,Pj
T and t, for a total of (2 × j + 1) variables. In
the initial design, feasible analytical initial values are assigned to these variables. Other
node initial values are obtained through B-spline curves, and a subsequent iterative op-
timization is conducted based on this foundation to obtain the state parameters under
the minimum energy consumption. The minimum energy consumption trajectory is then
obtained by combining the dynamic and kinematic equations.
2.2. Objective Function
Calculate the state variables of the flying car at each state point, including the power
provided by the battery, velocity, acceleration, and force situation. Based on the battery
power, calculate the energy consumption for each time interval, and finally accumulate to
obtain the total energy consumption during the takeoff process. Through the calculations,
obtain the state variables at each state point for the minimum energy consumption scenario.
Combine dynamic and kinematic equations to calculate the trajectory. This leads to the
objective function of minimizing energy consumption:
min f (x) = min
n
∑
i=1
E(i) = min
n
∑
i=1
Pi·t/(n − 1). (10)
n is the number of state points and Pi is the power supplied by the battery at the i-th
state point.
2.3. Constraint
During the optimization process, constraints must also be imposed to ensure that the
system dynamics are met and obstacles are avoided.
(1) Initial state and final state: the starting point and the final point of the eVTOL
must satisfy the given constraints. This paper focuses on trajectory optimization during
takeoff. The initial state is set as the stationary state r0 = [x0, y0]T, with initial velocity
v0 =

vx0, vy0
T. The final state is set as reaching the specified positionr f inal =
h
x f inal, y f inal
iT
and velocity v f inal =
h
vx f inal , vy f inal
iT
. The constraints in the terminated state are as follows:
 yn ≥ y f inal
vxn = v f inal
(11)

===== PAGE 7 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 7 of 18
vxn is the final velocity of the eVTOL in the horizontal direction during takeoff, v f inal
is the final velocity it needs to reach, yn is the altitude of the eVTOL from the ground at the
final state point, and y f inal is the required final height.
(2) Dynamic constraints: The speed and acceleration of the eVTOL must satisfy the
constraints of the dynamic model. The acceleration must also take into account the comfort
of the passengers, as an overall acceleration of more than 1 g can cause discomfort or
dizziness. It is generally accepted that accelerations in the range of 0.1 g to 0.5 g are more
comfortable for passengers and a value of 0.3 g is often used. Consideration must also
be given to avoiding stall conditions during flight, as stalls can have adverse effects. The
power of the eVTOL battery is also limited and should not exceed the maximum power it
can provide. There are also limitations on the wing angle to the vertical, which should not
exceed a certain range during flight. The dynamic limitations are as follows:



ai ≤ amax
−αs ≤ αi ≤ αs
Pi ≤ Pmax
θmin ≤ θi ≤ θmax
(12)
ai is the combined acceleration at the i-th point, amax is the maximum acceleration
considering passenger comfort, αi is the wing angle of attack at the i-th point, αs is the stall
angle of attack, Pmax is the maximum power supplied by the battery, θi is the magnitude of
the wing angle to vertical at the i-th state point, and θmin and θmax are the minimum and
maximum wing angle to vertical, respectively.
(3) Obstacle constraints: The flight path of a flying car must avoid obstacles. According
to the Civil Aviation Administration of China, rotorcraft must maintain a safety distance of
1.5 times the length or width of the aircraft—whichever is greater—when taking off. As
there are no specific laws and regulations for flying cars, this restriction is currently applied.
In this paper, we will define the position of the obstacle as well as the height information
by obtaining the profile height data of the obstacle, with the data type being DEM-30. The
constraints on the obstacles are as follows:
Di ≥ Dmax (13)
Di is the distance between eVTOL and the nearest point of the obstacle at the i-th point
and Di =
q
(xi − xoi)2 + (yi − yoi)2. Dmax is the maximum spacing, (xi, yi) is the position
of the eVTOL at the i-th point, and (xoi, yoi) is the position of the nearest obstacle to the
i-th point.
In summary, the constraints of the optimization problem can be obtained as follows:



yn ≥ y f inal
vn = v f inal
ai ≤ amax
−αs ≤ αi ≤ αs
Di ≥ Dmax
Pi ≤ Pmax
θmin ≤ θi ≤ θmax
(14)
3. Methodological Options
From the optimization model in the previous section, the trajectory optimization
problem in this paper becomes a nonlinear optimization problem with equation constraints,
inequality constraints, and boundary constraints; therefore, the SLSQP (Sequential Least
Squares Quadratic Programming) algorithm is adopted in this paper. The advantage of the
SLSQP algorithm is that it can efficiently deal with the optimization problem with nonlinear
constraints, and usually finds the optimal solution within a small number of iterations.

===== PAGE 8 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 8 of 18
SLSQP is an optimization algorithm for nonlinear constrained optimization problems.
It is a sequential quadratic programming method that solves the nonlinear constrained
problem by transforming it into a series of quadratic programming subproblems. The key
feature of the SLSQP algorithm is its ability to handle optimization problems with nonlinear
constraints, using an approximate quadratic model for optimization at each iteration step.
The SLSQP algorithm determines the quadratic model by calculating the first and second
derivatives of the objective function and the gradients of the constraint functions. This
derivative and gradient information are utilized in each iteration to expedite the search
for the optimal solution. The algorithm is primarily divided into two main phases: the
search phase and the correction phase. In the search phase, feasible points are found by
constructing a sequential quadratic programming model. In the correction phase, a local
search is performed at each iteration to obtain a better approximation and update the
current estimated points [19]. The optimization flowchart is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. SLSQP Optimization Process.
In the search phase, the original nonlinear constrained optimization problem is trans-
formed into an unconstrained least squares problem:

===== PAGE 9 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 9 of 18
L(x, λ, µ ) = f (P, t) + λTh(P, θ, t) − µ T
1 g1(P, θ, t) − µ T
2 g2(P, θ) − µ T
3 g3(θ) − µ T
4 g4(θ) − µ T
5 g5(P, θ, t)
−µ T
6 g6(P) − µ T
7 g7(P) − µ T
8 g8(θ) − µ T
9 g9(θ) (15)
λ and µ are the Lagrange multipliers for the equality and inequality constraints,
respectively. h(x) represents the equality constraint and g(x) represents the inequality
constraint. g1(P, θ, t) is the altitude constraint, g2(P, θ) is the acceleration constraint,
g3(θ) and g4(θ) are the angle of approach constraints, g5(P, θ, t) is the obstacle constraint,
g6 (P) and g7 (P) are the battery power constraints, g8(θ) and g9(θ) are the wing tilt angle
to vertical constraints, and h(P, θ, t) is the final horizontal direction velocity constraint.
The update direction is obtained by solving the following least squares subproblem:
min 1
2
Rkd − uk

2
s.t.
h
∇h

xk
iT
·d + h

xk

= 0
h
∇g

xk
iT
·d + g

xk

≥ 0 (16)
where ∇h

xk

is the gradient vector of the equality constraints after k iterations, g

xk

is
the gradient vector of the inequality constraints, Rk is an upper triangular matrix, and uk is
a vector whose relation satisfies the following equation translation:

Rk
T
Rk = Bk (17)

Rk
T
uk = −∇ f

xk

(18)
Bk is an approximate Hessian matrix of L(x, λ, µ ).
During the correction phase, the update variable needs to calculate the learning rate
δ = min(1, r), where r is calculated as follows:



r = max
 
βs, rq

βs =
 ∂ f
∂x
T
(d/s)
rq =
 ∂∇ f
∂x
T
(d/q)
(19)
s and q are correction factors, d is the update direction obtained by solving the
least squares subproblem, and finally the decision variables can be updated as follows,
xk+1 = xk + δd, where k is the current iteration number.
4. Example and Analysis of Results
In order to verify the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed method, this paper
takes the Airbus Vahana A 3 tilt-wing eVTOL as an example (Figure 3) and carries out
the longitudinal obstacle avoidance trajectory planning in two cases: obstacle-free and
obstacle-present. In the case of obstacles, different terrains around Zijin Mountain in
Nanjing were selected as obstacle constraints, and the terrain data were taken from the
National Geospatial Data Cloud website. Table 1 provides the basic parameter information
of Vahana A3.

===== PAGE 10 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 10 of 18
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 9 of 17 
 
constraint, 𝑔଺ (𝑃)  and 𝑔଻ (𝑃)  are the ba ttery power constraints, 𝑔଼(𝜃)  and 𝑔ଽ(𝜃)  are 
the wing tilt angle to vertical constraints, and ℎ(𝑃, 𝜃, 𝑡) is the ﬁnal horizontal direction 
velocity constraint. 
The update direction is obtained by solving the following least squares subproblem: 
 𝑚𝑖𝑛 1
2 ‖𝑅௞𝑑−𝑢 ௞‖ଶ 
𝑠. 𝑡. [∇ℎ(𝑥௞)]்· 𝑑 + ℎ(𝑥௞) =0  
  [∇𝑔(𝑥௞)]்· 𝑑 + 𝑔(𝑥௞) ≥ 0 
(16)
where ∇ℎ(𝑥௞) is the gradient vector of the equality constraints after 𝑘 iterations, 𝑔(𝑥௞) 
is the gradient vector of the inequality constraints, 𝑅௞ is an upper triangular matrix, and 
𝑢௞ is a vector whose relation satis ﬁes the following equation translation: 
(𝑅௞)்𝑅௞= 𝐵௞ (17)
(𝑅௞)்𝑢௞= −∇𝑓(𝑥௞) (18)
𝐵௞ is an approximate Hessian matrix of  𝐿(𝑥, 𝜆, 𝜇). 
During the correction phase, the update variable needs to calculate the learning rate 
𝛿 = 𝑚𝑖𝑛 (1, 𝑟), where 𝑟 is calculated as follows: 
⎩
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎧ 𝑟 =m a x൫𝛽௦, 𝑟௤൯
𝛽௦= ൬𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝑥൰
்
(𝑑𝑠⁄ )
𝑟௤= ൬𝜕∇𝑓
𝜕𝑥 ൰
்
(𝑑𝑞⁄ )
 (19)
𝑠  and 𝑞  are correction factors, 𝑑  is the update direction obtained by solving the 
least squares subproblem, and ﬁnally the decision variables can be updated as follows, 
𝑥௞ାଵ= 𝑥௞+ 𝛿𝑑, where 𝑘 is the current iteration number. 
4. Example and Analysis of Results 
In order to verify the feasibility and eﬀectiveness of the proposed method, this paper 
takes the Airbus Vahana A3 tilt-wing eVTOL as an example ( Figure 3) and carries out the 
longitudinal obstacle avoidance trajectory planning in two cases: obstacle-free and obsta-
cle-present. In the case of obstacles, di ﬀerent terrains around Zijin Mountain in Nanjing 
were selected as obstacle constraints, and th e terrain data were taken from the National 
Geospatial Data Cloud website. Table 1 prov ides the basic parameter information of Va-
hana A3. 
 
Figure 3. Vahana A3. 
  
Figure 3. Vahana A3.
Table 1. Vahana A3 Performance Parameters.
Parameters Value Unit
Number of propellers Np 8
Propeller radius R 0.75 m
Number of propeller blades Nb 3
Fuselage length Lb 5.324 m
Fuselage width Wb 4.972 m
Maximum electric power Pmax 311,000 W
Takeoff weight M 725 kg
Propeller blade chord length c 0.1 m
wing area S 9 m2
The optimization needs to take into account the performance of the Vahana A 3, in-
cluding parameters such as battery power, speed, acceleration, and angle of approach. Its
acceleration is calculated as follows:
(
ax = Tsinθ−D1sin(θ+α)−D2sin(θ+αEFF )−Lcos(θ+αEFF )−Ncos θ
m
ay = Tcosθ−D1cos(θ+α)−D2cos(θ+αEFF )+Lsin(θ+αEFF )+Ncos θ−mg
m
(20)
α is the wing angle of attack, αEFF is the effective free-stream angle of attack, m is the
aircraft mass, T is the total thrust, D1 is the fuselage drag, D2 is the total drag on both
wings, L is the total lift on both wings, N is the total normal force on the propeller, and g is
the acceleration due to gravity.
For the end state, this paper also adopts Uber’s published mission requirements,
which specify reaching a height of 305 m and a cruising speed of 67 m/s. The stall angle of
attack for the Vahana A3 is 15◦. The safety distance should be greater than 1.5 times the
length of the fuselage, which in this case is taken as 8 m. The maximum power output of
the batteries used is 311 kW and the tilt angle of the wings is between 0◦ and 135◦.
Combined with the above, the specific constraints for the whole optimization problem
can be obtained as follows: 


yn ≥ 305 m
vxn = 67 m/sq
axi
2 + ayi
2 ≤ 0.3 g
−15◦ ≤ αi ≤ 15◦
Di ≥ 8 m
Pi ≤ 311, 000 W
0◦ ≤ θi ≤ 135◦
(21)
During the operation of tilt-wing type eVTOL, the induced velocity caused by the
propellers generates an induced speed that affects the wings to a certain extent. According

===== PAGE 11 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 11 of 18
to reference [ 18], the results show that the effect is not significant for the Vahana A 3
configuration. In this paper, we use the ideal case with coefficients close to 100%.
4.1. T rajectory Planning without Obstacles
In this part, the methodology of this paper is verified through specific simulation
examples. The SLSQP algorithm is used to solve the trajectory optimization problem based
on minimizing energy consumption. The optimization is terminated when the change in
the objective function value is less than 10−6 and the maximum number of iterations is set
to 400. The simulation results are compared with the related studies for a validity analysis.
The parameters of the initial and final states of the simulation are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Simulation parameters1.
Categories Parameters Value Unit
Initial state Displacement [0, 0] m
Velocity [0, 0] m/s
Termination state Displacement [x , 305] m
Velocity

67, vy ] m/s
The number of control points for the decision variables j is taken as 20 and the initial
solution setup is shown in Table 3:
Table 3. Initial solution.
Value Unit Quantity
Flight time t 25 s 1
Wing angle to verticalθ [36, 36, 36, . . ., 36] ◦ 20
Battery power P [300,000, 300,000, 300,000, . . ., 300,000] W 20
Figure 4 shows the takeoff trajectory with no obstacles and state variables during the
process. The entire process lasts around 26 s with an energy consumption of 1861.2 W·h.
The takeoff trajectory was smooth with no significant fluctuations. In the first 6 s, the wing
angle to the vertical increased from 11 degrees near vertical to 40◦at a relatively fast rate,
with the power stabilizing at around 190 kW. In the next 8 s, the wings started to slow down
its tilt rate, gradually increasing to 54◦, during which the battery power increased to 290
kW. At this point, the eVTOL climbed to around 200m and started to slow down its ascent
rate. In the remaining 12 s, the wing angle to vertical was gradually increased to 80 ◦ while
the battery power increased to the maximum power it could provide—311 kW. Finally,
the eVTOL accelerated to the required cruise speed and reached the required altitude.
Throughout the whole process, there were no stall situations and acceleration remained
below 0.3 g.
From Figure 4, it can be observed that the optimized trajectory, wing angle to the
vertical, flight speed, angle of attack, battery power, acceleration, wing lift and drag, and
total thrust received by the eVTOL exhibit a trend of change over time that is almost
identical to the research conducted by Shamsheer S. Chauhan et al [ 18]. In the given
operating condition, Shamsheer S. Chauhan et al. optimized for a runtime of 27 s with
a minimum energy consumption of 1863.1 W ·h, while this paper achieved a minimum
energy consumption of 1861.2 W·h, showing a very small difference. To test the robustness
of this method, different termination state parameters are set while keeping the initial state
unchanged. The new simulation parameters are shown in Table 4.

===== PAGE 12 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 12 of 18
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 11 of 17 
 
Table 2. Simulation parameters1. 
Categories Parameters Value Unit 
Initial state Displacement [0, 0] m 
Velocity [0, 0] m/s 
Termination state Displacement [ 𝑥, 305] m 
Velocity [67, 𝑣௬] m/s 
The number of control points for the decision variables 𝑗 is taken as 20 and the initial 
solution setup is shown in Table 3: 
Table 3. Initial solution. 
 Value Unit Quantity 
Flight time 𝑡 25 s 1 
Wing angle to vertical 𝜃 [36, 36, 36, …, 36] ° 20 
Battery power 𝑃 [300,000, 300,000, 300,000, …, 300,000] W 20 
Figure 4 shows the takeoﬀ trajectory with no obstacles and state variables during the 
process. The entire process lasts around 26 s with an energy consumption of 1861.2 W·h. 
The takeoﬀ trajectory was smooth with no signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations. In the ﬁrst 6 s, the wing 
angle to the vertical increased from 11 degrees near vertical to 40°at a relatively fast rate, 
with the power stabilizing at around 190 kW. In the next 8 s, the wings started to slow 
down its tilt rate, gradually increasing to 54°, during which the ba ttery power increased 
to 290 kW. At this point, the eVTOL climbed to around 200m and started to slow down its 
ascent rate. In the remaining 12 s, the wing angle to vertical was gradually increased to 80° 
while the battery power increased to the maximum power it could provide—311 kW. Fi-
nally, the eVTOL accelerated to the required  cruise speed and reached the required alti-
tude. Throughout the whole process, there were  no stall situations and acceleration re-
mained below 0.3 g. 
 
Figure 4. State parameters when the termination state was [𝑥, 305] and [67, 𝑣௬] without obstacles, 
where the dashed line is the results of literature [18] and the solid line is the ﬁndings of this paper. 
From Figure 4, it can be observed that the optimized trajectory, wing angle to the 
vertical, ﬂight speed, angle of attack, battery power, acceleration, wing lift and drag, and 
total thrust received by the eVTOL exhibit a trend of change over time that is almost iden-
tical to the research conducted by Shamsheer S. Chauhan et al [18]. In the given operating 
condition, Shamsheer S. Chauhan et al. opti mized for a runtime of 27 s with a minimum 
Figure 4. State parameters when the termination state was [ x, 305] and [67, vy] without obstacles,
where the dashed line is the results of literature [18] and the solid line is the findings of this paper.
Table 4. Simulation parameters2.
Categories Parameters Value Unit
Initial state Displacement [0, 0] m
Velocity [0, 0] m/s
Termination state Displacement [x , 200] m
Velocity

52.7, vy ] m/s
Given a final cruise speed of 52.7 m/s (the official cruise speed of the Vahana A3) and
a final altitude of more than 200 m, the optimization of the takeoff trajectory with minimum
energy consumption in this state is investigated, and the results are shown in Figure 5.
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 12 of 17 
 
energy consumption of 1863.1 W·h, while this paper achieved a minimum energy con-
sumption of 1861.2 W·h, showing a very small di ﬀerence. To test the robustness of this 
method, diﬀerent termination state parameters are set while keeping the initial state un-
changed. The new simulation parameters are shown in Table 4. 
Table 4. Simulation parameters2. 
Categories Parameters Value Unit 
Initial state Displacement [0, 0] m 
Velocity [0, 0] m/s 
Termination state Displacement [ 𝑥, 200] m 
Velocity [52.7,𝑣௬] m/s 
Given a ﬁnal cruise speed of 52.7 m/s (the oﬃcial cruise speed of the Vahana A3) and 
a ﬁnal altitude of more than 200 m, the optimization of the takeo ﬀ trajectory with mini-
mum energy consumption in this state is investigated, and the results are shown in Figure 
5. 
 
Figure 5. State parameters when the termination state is [𝑥, 200] and [52.7, 𝑣௬] without obstacles. 
The whole process lasted 21.57 s, with an  energy consumption of 1293.52 W·h. The 
generated takeoﬀ trajectory was smooth, with a relatively gentle change in the wing angle 
to vertical, which guaranteed safety. The speed was similar to the previous condition, 
steadily increasing to the speciﬁed speed, with the angle of a ttack below 15° and no stall 
phenomenon. The acceleration also remained below 0.3 g. Due to the reduced ﬁnal height 
and speed requirements, the time and horizontal displacement to reach the endpoint were 
decreased. The ba ttery power decreased to around 200 kW, resulting in reduced energy 
consumption. 
It can be seen that the performance of this paper’s method in obstacle-free trajectory 
planning is comparable to that of the existing  research results, and it can be adapted to 
takeoﬀ trajectory planning in diﬀerent situations. Therefore, it can be used for takeoﬀ ob-
stacle avoidance trajectory planning on this basis. 
4.2. Trajectory Planning with Obstacles 
When planning the obstacle avoidance trajectory, the initial and ﬁnal states are set 
up in the same way as when there is no obstacle, with the diﬀerence being that the proﬁle 
Figure 5. State parameters when the termination state is [x, 200] and [52.7, vy] without obstacles.
The whole process lasted 21.57 s, with an energy consumption of 1293.52 W·h. The
generated takeoff trajectory was smooth, with a relatively gentle change in the wing angle
to vertical, which guaranteed safety. The speed was similar to the previous condition,

===== PAGE 13 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 13 of 18
steadily increasing to the specified speed, with the angle of attack below 15◦ and no stall
phenomenon. The acceleration also remained below 0.3 g. Due to the reduced final height
and speed requirements, the time and horizontal displacement to reach the endpoint were
decreased. The battery power decreased to around 200 kW, resulting in reduced energy
consumption.
It can be seen that the performance of this paper’s method in obstacle-free trajectory
planning is comparable to that of the existing research results, and it can be adapted to
takeoff trajectory planning in different situations. Therefore, it can be used for takeoff
obstacle avoidance trajectory planning on this basis.
4.2. T rajectory Planning with Obstacles
When planning the obstacle avoidance trajectory, the initial and final states are set up
in the same way as when there is no obstacle, with the difference being that the profile data
of the obstacles are added to the optimization model as a new constraint. The trajectory of
the flying car is ensured to cross the obstacle by setting a new inequality constraint, i.e., the
distance between the position of the flying car and the obstacle is greater than the set safety
distance. Then, the SLSQP algorithm is used to optimize the trajectory to make the eVTOL
avoid the obstacle as much as possible. Figure 6 illustrates the results of the optimization of
the takeoff trajectory under the influence of obstacle 1, selecting different terrains around
Purple Mountain in Nanjing City as obstacle constraints with terrain data sourced from
the National Geographic Spatial Data Cloud website “www.gscloud.cn (accessed on 23
February 2024)”.
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 13 of 17 
 
data of the obstacles are added to the optimization model as a new constraint. The trajec-
tory of the ﬂying car is ensured to cross the obstacle by setting a new inequality constraint, 
i.e., the distance between the position of the ﬂying car and the obstacle is greater than the 
set safety distance. Then, the SLSQP algorithm is used to optimize the trajectory to make 
the eVTOL avoid the obstacle as much as poss ible. Figure 6 illustrates the results of the 
optimization of the takeoﬀ trajectory under the inﬂuence of obstacle 1, selecting diﬀerent 
terrains around Purple Mountain in Nanjing City as obstacle constraints with terrain data 
sourced from the National Geographic Spatial Data Cloud website “www.gscloud.cn (ac-
cessed on 23 February 2024)”. 
 
Figure 6. State parameters aﬀected by obstacle 1. 
A comparison of the trajectories with and without obstacles is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Takeoﬀ trajectory aﬀected by obstacle 1. 
With the obstacle constraint, the whole process took 27.67 s and the energy consump-
tion was 1874.6 W·h. It is evident that the trajectory without obstacles collided with the 
mountain at 400 m, and the trajectory after adding the obstacle constraints is smooth, suc-
cessfully crossing the obstac les and maintaining a safe di stance. The changes in speed, 
Figure 6. State parameters affected by obstacle 1.
A comparison of the trajectories with and without obstacles is shown in Figure 7.
With the obstacle constraint, the whole process took 27.67 s and the energy consump-
tion was 1874.6 W·h. It is evident that the trajectory without obstacles collided with the
mountain at 400 m, and the trajectory after adding the obstacle constraints is smooth,
successfully crossing the obstacles and maintaining a safe distance. The changes in speed,
wing angle to the vertical, angle of attack, lift, drag, and total thrust on the wing are not
very different. In comparing the accelerations, it can be seen that the scenario without
obstacles was relatively more stable. In the presence of obstacles, the battery power was
higher than the scenario without obstacles before 13 s but lower after 13 s.

===== PAGE 14 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 14 of 18
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 13 of 17 
 
data of the obstacles are added to the optimization model as a new constraint. The trajec-
tory of the ﬂying car is ensured to cross the obstacle by setting a new inequality constraint, 
i.e., the distance between the position of the ﬂying car and the obstacle is greater than the 
set safety distance. Then, the SLSQP algorithm is used to optimize the trajectory to make 
the eVTOL avoid the obstacle as much as poss ible. Figure 6 illustrates the results of the 
optimization of the takeoﬀ trajectory under the inﬂuence of obstacle 1, selecting diﬀerent 
terrains around Purple Mountain in Nanjing City as obstacle constraints with terrain data 
sourced from the National Geographic Spatial Data Cloud website “www.gscloud.cn (ac-
cessed on 23 February 2024)”. 
 
Figure 6. State parameters aﬀected by obstacle 1. 
A comparison of the trajectories with and without obstacles is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Takeoﬀ trajectory aﬀected by obstacle 1. 
With the obstacle constraint, the whole process took 27.67 s and the energy consump-
tion was 1874.6 W·h. It is evident that the trajectory without obstacles collided with the 
mountain at 400 m, and the trajectory after adding the obstacle constraints is smooth, suc-
cessfully crossing the obstac les and maintaining a safe di stance. The changes in speed, 
Figure 7. Takeoff trajectory affected by obstacle 1.
To ensure the robustness of the method in the obstacle avoidance situation, different
terrain obstacles are changed to verify the obstacle avoidance performance. The simulation
parameters are the same as in Table 2, the initial state is the stationary state, and the final
state is to reach the height of 305 m and the speed reaches 67 m/s. The results of the
simulation are shown in Figures 8 and 9.
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 14 of 17 
 
wing angle to the vertical, angle of a ttack, lift, drag, and total thrust on the wing are not 
very diﬀerent. In comparing the accelerations, it  can be seen that the scenario without 
obstacles was relatively more stable. In the presence of obstacles, the ba ttery power was 
higher than the scenario without obstacles before 13 s but lower after 13 s. 
To ensure the robustness of the method in the obstacle avoidance situation, diﬀerent 
terrain obstacles are changed to verify the obstacle avoidance performance. The simula-
tion parameters are the same as in Table 2, the initial state is the stationary state, and the 
ﬁnal state is to reach the height of 305 m an d the speed reaches 67 m/s. The results of the 
simulation are shown in Figures 8 and 9. 
 
Figure 8. State parameters aﬀected by obstacle 2. 
 
Figure 9. Takeoﬀ trajectory aﬀected by obstacle 2. 
Under the inﬂuence of this obstacle, the whole takeo ﬀ process takes 28.88 s and the 
energy consumption is 1902 .55 W·h. As the obstacle is closer to the takeo ﬀ point in this 
case and has a greater inﬂuence on the trajectory at the beginning of the takeoﬀ, the wing 
angle to the vertical at the beginning of the takeo ﬀ is slightly smaller than in the case 
without obstacles, i.e., it is closer to the vertical takeo ﬀ case. As a result, the power at the 
beginning of takeo ﬀ is slightly higher compared to the scenario without obstacles. No 
Figure 8. State parameters affected by obstacle 2.
Under the influence of this obstacle, the whole takeoff process takes 28.88 s and the
energy consumption is 1902.55 W·h. As the obstacle is closer to the takeoff point in this
case and has a greater influence on the trajectory at the beginning of the takeoff, the wing
angle to the vertical at the beginning of the takeoff is slightly smaller than in the case
without obstacles, i.e., it is closer to the vertical takeoff case. As a result, the power at the
beginning of takeoff is slightly higher compared to the scenario without obstacles. No
stalling occurred and the acceleration remained below 0.3 g. Figure 8 shows the comparison
between the initial trajectory and the obstacle avoidance trajectory, clearly demonstrating
that the new optimized trajectory also successfully avoids collisions with obstacles. This
further confirms that the method has good robustness in obstacle avoidance scenarios.

===== PAGE 15 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 15 of 18
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 14 of 17 
 
wing angle to the vertical, angle of a ttack, lift, drag, and total thrust on the wing are not 
very diﬀerent. In comparing the accelerations, it  can be seen that the scenario without 
obstacles was relatively more stable. In the presence of obstacles, the ba ttery power was 
higher than the scenario without obstacles before 13 s but lower after 13 s. 
To ensure the robustness of the method in the obstacle avoidance situation, diﬀerent 
terrain obstacles are changed to verify the obstacle avoidance performance. The simula-
tion parameters are the same as in Table 2, the initial state is the stationary state, and the 
ﬁnal state is to reach the height of 305 m an d the speed reaches 67 m/s. The results of the 
simulation are shown in Figures 8 and 9. 
 
Figure 8. State parameters aﬀected by obstacle 2. 
 
Figure 9. Takeoﬀ trajectory aﬀected by obstacle 2. 
Under the inﬂuence of this obstacle, the whole takeo ﬀ process takes 28.88 s and the 
energy consumption is 1902 .55 W·h. As the obstacle is closer to the takeo ﬀ point in this 
case and has a greater inﬂuence on the trajectory at the beginning of the takeoﬀ, the wing 
angle to the vertical at the beginning of the takeo ﬀ is slightly smaller than in the case 
without obstacles, i.e., it is closer to the vertical takeo ﬀ case. As a result, the power at the 
beginning of takeo ﬀ is slightly higher compared to the scenario without obstacles. No 
Figure 9. Takeoff trajectory affected by obstacle 2.
5. Conclusions
The aim of this article is to address the high energy consumption and obstacle inter-
ference problems faced by eVTOL during the takeoff phase. Specifically, the high energy
consumption and the presence of obstacles during the takeoff phase make flight path
planning complex and difficult. This study not only provides a new approach for eVTOL
takeoff obstacle avoidance in complex urban environments but also provides substantial
technical references and solution ideas for future path planning problems similar to those
of flying cars.
By considering energy optimization, obstacle avoidance, and trajectory planning
comprehensively, the inherent connections between them are explored to establish an
optimization model for the takeoff trajectory with obstacle avoidance. Based on the opti-
mization principles of the SLSQP algorithm, the search model and state iteration formula
are derived. The effectiveness, stability, and robustness of the model and algorithm were
verified through the design of various operating conditions, leading to the following
conclusions:
(1) When modelling the trajectory planning problem for tilt-wing eVTOL with obstacle
avoidance, common issues such as downwash and wake effects of airflow, as well
as the coupling effect between thrust and induced velocity, were considered. A
parameterized energy calculation model and dynamic model were established to give
the model in this paper generality and good versatility.
(2) The continuous process of energy accumulation and dynamic state change is dis-
cretized.
(3) The optimization model and the gradient descent search and state iteration processes
of the SLSQP algorithm were integrated to design a general solution algorithm for the
trajectory planning problem of tilt-wing eVTOL with obstacle avoidance.
(4) An example of trajectory planning for takeoff and obstacle avoidance of the Airbus
Vahana A3 demonstrates that the model and optimization algorithm developed in
this paper exhibit good stability and robustness. They can provide a certain reference
for the three-dimensional obstacle avoidance trajectory planning of Airbus Vahana A3
and other tilt-wing eVTOL trajectory planning problems.
Autonomous takeoff and landing functionality, as a crucial feature of eVTOL au-
tonomous flight control systems, is essential for enabling other complex flight capabilities.
The landing phase faces similar challenges as the takeoff phase. Due to the characteristics of
low-density obstacles and multiple co-linear aircraft in the Urban Air Mobility environment,
dynamic collision avoidance with moving objects such as other eVTOL, birds, and balloons
needs to be considered. Therefore, future research needs to break through in the following
two aspects:

===== PAGE 16 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 16 of 18
(1) Landing is one of the most challenging parts of the eVTOL flight process, especially
under adverse weather or complex terrain conditions. Precisely planning the landing
trajectory ensures that the eVTOL safely reaches its destination, avoiding potential col-
lision risks. Takeoff and landing are prerequisites for enabling the autonomous flight
of eVTOLs. The proper planning of takeoff and landing trajectories can fully leverage
the significant advantage of eVTOLs in flexible takeoff and landing operations in the
UAM environment.
(2) Dynamic collision avoidance involves responding to unplanned flight conflicts swiftly.
Algorithms for this type of collision avoidance generally provide rapid responses
to unexpected flight conflicts. Compared to static collision avoidance algorithms,
dynamic collision avoidance algorithms offer higher flexibility and responsiveness.
In the more flexible and complex UAM environment, the probability of airspace
emergencies will increase significantly, necessitating more flexible and rapid collision
avoidance measures.
During the optimization process of takeoff trajectories, it was found that SLSQP is
sensitive to initial values. The selection of initial values significantly affects the optimization
time and results. Therefore, further improvements can be made to the algorithm to enhance
its performance.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, P .L.; methodology, G.Z. writing—original draft prepara-
tion, G.Z.; writing—review and editing, P .L.; writing—review and editing, D.W.; supervision, P .L. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the China Scholarship Council, grant number 202308320187.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article; further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Nomenclature
Roman Symbols
FA the aerodynamic force
FP the propulsion force
FG the force of gravity
m the mass of the eVTOL
.
v the derivative of velocity
v the velocity vector
.
r the derivative of a displacement
r the position vector
x the displacement in the horizontal direction
y the displacement in the vertical direction
T total thrust
L the lift of the wing
D1 the drag of the wing
D2 the drag of the fuselage
S the wing area
CL the lift coefficient of the wing
CD the drag coefficient of the wing
vi the induced velocity
V∞⊥ the component of the free-stream velocity
SP the area of the propeller
S f the reference area of the fuselage
CD f the drag coefficient of the fuselage
P the battery power
PP the propeller power

===== PAGE 17 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 17 of 18
t flight time
a acceleration
E energy
α the wing angle of attack
αEFF the effective free-stream angle of attack
Np number of propellers
R propeller radius
Nb number of propeller blades
Lb fuselage length
Wb fuselage width
M takeoff weight
c propeller blade chord length
s correction factors
q correction factors
k iterations
Greek Symbols
ρ the air density
θ the wing angle to the vertical
λ Lagrange multipliers for the equality constraints
µ Lagrange multipliers for the inequality constraints
δ learning rate
References
1. National Academies of Sciences; Division on Engineering; Physical Sciences, Aeronautics; Space Engineering Board; Committee
on Enhancing Air Mobilityâ. Advancing Aerial Mobility: A National Blueprint ; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA,
2020.
2. Eker, U.; Fountas, G.; Anastasopoulos, P .C.; Still, S.E. An exploratory investigation of public perceptions towards key benefits and
concerns from the future use of flying cars. T ravel Behav. Soc.2020, 19, 54–66. [CrossRef]
3. Urban Air Mobility (UAM) Concept of Operations v2.0 ; Federal Aviation Admin.: Washington, DC, USA, 2023.
4. Zhang, J.; Liu, Y.; Zheng, Y. Overall eVTOL aircraft design for urban air mobility. Green Energy Intell. T ransp. 2024, 3, 100150.
[CrossRef]
5. Misra, A.; Jayachandran, S.; Kenche, S.; Katoch, A.; Suresh, A.; Gundabattini, E.; Legesse, A.A. A Review on Vertical Take-Off and
Landing (VTOL) Tilt-Rotor and Tilt Wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs).J. Eng. 2022, 2022, 1803638. [CrossRef]
6. Al-Rubaye, S.; Tsourdos, A.; Namuduri, K. Advanced air mobility operation and infrastructure for sustainable connected evtol
vehicle. Drones 2023, 7, 319. [CrossRef]
7. Zaid, A.A.; Belmekki, B.E.Y.; Alouini, M.S. eVTOL communications and networking in UAM: Requirements, key enablers, and
challenges. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2023, 61, 154–160.
8. Zhou, Y.; Zhao, H.; Liu, Y. An evaluative review of the VTOL technologies for unmanned and manned aerial vehicles.Comput.
Commun. 2020, 149, 356–369. [CrossRef]
9. Ugwueze, O.; Statheros, T.; Bromfield, M.A.; Horri, N. Trends in eVTOL aircraft development: The concepts, enablers and
challenges. In Proceedings of the AIAA Scitech 2023 Forum, National Harbor, MD, USA, 23–27 January 2023; p. 2096.
10. Vieira, D.R.; Silva, D.; Bravo, A. Electric VTOL aircraft: The future of urban air mobility (background, advantages and challenges).
Int. J. Sustain. Aviat. 2019, 5, 101–118. [CrossRef]
11. Duan, H.; Yu, Y.; Zhang, X. Three-dimension path planning for UCAV using hybrid meta-heuristic ACO-DE algorithm.Simul.
Model. Pract. Theory 2010, 18, 1104–1115. [CrossRef]
12. Gutierrez-Martinez, M.A.; Rojo-Rodriguez, E.G.; Cabriales-Ramirez, L.E.; Reyes-Osorio, L.A.; Castillo, P .; Garcia-Salazar, O.
Collision-free path planning based on a genetic algorithm for quadrotor UAVs. In Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Athens, Greece, 1–4 September 2020; pp. 948–957.
13. Karahan, M.; Kasnakoglu, C. Path planning and collision avoidance with artificial intelligence for a quadrotor UAV . In Proceedings
of the 2021 International Conference Automatics and Informatics (ICAI), Varna, Bulgaria, 30 September–2 October 2021; pp. 163–
166.
14. Pradeep, P .; Lauderdale, T.A.; Chatterji, G.B.; Sheth, K.; Lai, C.F.; Sridhar, B.; Erzberger, H. Wind-optimal trajectories for multirotor
eVTOL aircraft on UAM missions. In Proceedings of the Aiaa Aviation 2020 Forum, Virtual Event, 15–19 June 2020; p. 3271.
15. Wang, Z.; Wei, P .; Sun, L. Optimal cruise, descent, and landing of eVTOL vehicles for urban air mobility using convex optimization.
In Proceedings of the AIAA Scitech 2021 Forum, Virtual Event, 1–21 January 2021; p. 577.
16. Yan, X.F.; Chen, R.L. Trajectory optimization for short takeoff and single-engine failure landing of tiltrotor aircraft.J. Harbin Inst.
T echnol.2017, 49, 38–44.
17. Pradeep, P .; Wei, P . Energy efficient arrival with RTA constraint for urban eVTOL operations. In Proceedings of the 2018 AIAA
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Kissimmee, FL, USA, 8–12 January 2018; p. 2008.

===== PAGE 18 / 18 =====
World Electr. Veh. J. 2024, 15, 300 18 of 18
18. Chauhan, S.S.; Martins, J.R.R.A. Tilt-wing eVTOL takeoff trajectory optimization. J. Aircr. 2020, 57, 93–112. [CrossRef]
19. Ma, Y.; Gao, X.; Liu, C.; Li, J. Improved SQP and SLSQP Algorithms for Feasible Path-based Process Optimization.arXiv 2024,
arXiv:2402.10396.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.